Six and four.
Okay. No
problems.
Right. Good.
Right, Kelly, we've
got the
Salvation Army.
Why am I...
Hold
on.
Kelly, are you there?
Oh, shall I just-
We'll start with the Salvation Army, if we may.
Charlotte, Kelly's not here.
Oh, is it Charlotte? Thanks, Carl.
Anna.
Oh, Anna? Well done. Right, Anna, we'll have--
We need someone from Salvation Army.
Yes. Yeah.
Can I start now? Good morning.
Yes. Is that you, Anna? Very good. Fantastic.
We've got 10 minutes with you.
Cool. Thank you. Mōrena koutou,
everybody. Thank you again to the Justice Select Committee for the opportunity
to speak to our submission for this bill.
The Salvation Army's mission is to care for people, transform lives and reform
society by God's power. We have worked in New
Zealand supporting communities in regards to alcohol harm for over a
century.
And so we are very interested in how
our country regulates alcohol and
so this is why we've engaged in this submission.
So the Salvation Army, we see alcohol harm across a wide spectrum
from our Bridge AOD services, which runs from
Kaikohe all the way down to the South Island, to Dunedin,
is the last,
but covers a wider area than Dunedin.
And so we're supporting tangata whai ora
in regards to addictions, but also their families.
Not just with alcohol, but with the majority of our tangata whai ora
are poly substance users. And then again, we see alcohol harm in
regards to property damage, family violence, financial
hardship, food insecurity.
And so the list goes on in regards to the
repercussions of alcohol harm that we're seeing in our communities.
And so we engage heavily in the district licensing process.
We've submitted on, I guess, all of the areas in this bill, but I just
want to quickly cover a few areas if I have
time to, and I'll try and leave time at the end for questions.
So we oppose the restrictions on those
that can object.
This year,
we've appeared before the Auckland DLC, the Tauranga DLC,
the Far North DLC, Horowhenua DLC.
The list goes on in regards to the DLCs that we engage
with, because that's where all of our services are.
And the common theme that we see in the objection process is that community
organizations like ours, like others that engage in this space,
we bear the brunt of alcohol harm. And the realities that we face is
very different to the realities that applicants or license holders face.
The DLC is a commission of inquiry, and so their job is
to be able to see different angles, and line them up
according to the act before a license is given.
And by limiting those who can object, you're ultimately limiting the
information that goes before a DLC to whether a
license is approved or not, or renewed.
And so that's a common theme that we see and a reason why
we think we shouldn't limit who can object.
Before the Community Participation Bill came into act,
the phrase that we used in the act was greater interest.
So the unspoken rule was two kilometers.
And so what the bill in 2023 did is it removed it.
We know submitters have come before you and talked about 500 meters and one
kilometer, but the boundaries of alcohol harm goes far beyond
where that particular premise is beyond 500 meters, beyond one kilometer.
We would suggest that if you are going to rein it in, rein it in to territorial
authorities, and not
one kilometer or 500 meters. The other area of the bill that we just wanted
to highly speak on was the applicant's right-Of reply.
We're not quite sure of the purpose of that, because in
our engagement and DRC process, we've engaged many times with
license holders or those that are applying for licenses in
regards to our objection before it gets to
the DRC. And we're able to talk to applicants around clarifications
around what they've applied for,
or
applicant holders are able to address our concerns and bring in discretionary
conditions, and that usually happens between
the license inspector or a lawyer.
And
we just think that the right of reply will move the process
into a
legal process and bring back
cross-examinations, which
we
had opposed and are grateful that they've gone.
Looking at the time, probably the
last thing or two more things that we just want to address is that the LAP process
is quite a vigorous process for local councils.
I mean, so there's a research process, and everyone's allowed to engage in the
LAP process. And so we think if you limit
the effectiveness of the LAP on
renewals,
that would diminish local democracy, and the ability for those
tools to be able to mitigate harm in their communities.
And also, those license holders can also engage in the LAP process as
well. The last thing I just want to mention, and I know some of this before, you
have talked about the trading hours, is that we would recommend a 9:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. national trading hours for off licenses.
We know that it's currently in place in Auckland.
We did an OIA to the police, and we know that when it came to Auckland,
across the police districts, the highest decreases when it came to
alcohol-related police incidences decreased significantly for
the three police districts, so Waitematā, Auckland, and County Manukau.
The highest was in Northland, but Northland only represents 5%
of alcohol-related police incident call-outs,
and Auckland, as a whole, represents 30%.
And so the highest decreases have been in Auckland, and that's from
the hours of 9:00 to 2:00 because that's when majority, I think over 40%,
of alcohol-related harm that police attend is between those hours, 9:00 to
2:00 a.m. And so if we rein in
those trading hours nationally for off licenses, we think it'd be a great balance
in regards to what the current bill is proposing
to bring in those national trading hours.
And so, again, our submission sort of outlined the areas that
we oppose and those that we agree with.
There are areas of the bill that we support.
But again, areas that we don't support and think that there are other ways
that it can be done that would
achieve the object of the Act. So, if there's any questions.
Right. Very good. Thank you very much.
Right, I've got a question from Mr. Stevenson.
Oh, thank you for your submission. Very helpful.
Just want to check,
the objection issue,
bill actually is drafted as you can object if you live in the
territorial authority area or within
the kilometer range. So would that satisfy
what you're after?
I think if we remove the kilometer range and just leave it to territorial
authority.
No. Well, this is the point. I just want to make sure you're clear.
It actually is an and/or test, so that's to make sure
that if you were living on the boundary of an authority but
the alcohol outlet is just across the border within two
kilometers, then you can still object. Am I making sense?
So I think the bill actually does what I think you want.
That's why I just wanted to clarify, because it's-- Yeah, your right to
object is if you live in the territorial authority or
you're two kilometers or whatever it is from the outlet.
So I think it-- That's why I just wanted to check if that would satisfy what you're
after.
Yeah. As long as it's not-- Because prior to the
Community Participation Bill coming in, it was two kilometers from the premise.
Yeah.
And so as long as it's not limiting-
No
... reverting back to that old-
Yeah. Okay, cool
... yeah.
This is a slight change. That's why I just wanted to clarify.
But thank you for your submission, and we've read it.
Hey, thank you very much, Anna, and joining us this morning.
Thank you.
Right. Now, I think we're going to Lizzie
Strickett. Is that correct?
Can I just ask which officials are in the room?
So it's not Kelly, I take it?
No, it's Anna.
No, it's Anna. It is Anna. We had two Annas back then. Okay, cool. Thanks, Anna.
Morena, tātou. Can you hear me?
We can.
Yeah.
And nice to be with you this morning. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Ka pai.
All right, let's do this.
Tēnā koutou katoa. Ko Lizzie Strickett toku ingoa.
I'm appearing today on behalf of Kētua o Matariki, which is
the iwi health and social service of Ngāti Paoa in Tāmaki Makaurau.
Joining me today is a member of our community, Hiwaati Rangi.
Last year, her kaiako, herself, her hua from her kōhanga,
Ngā Whare Maha in Rosedale,
joined us in opposing a proposed alcohol outlet opening within walking
distance of the kōhanga. And she wanted to be here today to
represent her kōhanga and her hapori.
So thank you for the opportunity to speak on this bill.
I'll take my submission as read, our submission as read, but just to
summarize, Kētua o Matariki supports matua tailhill young parents
through hapūtanga and the first 2,000 days of life.
And like the submission before us, every day, we see the impacts of alcohol
harm on our young whānau, our pipi, and our tamariki.
I'll take my submission as read but want to
raise three concerns or three points
that I've spoken toFirst, we've got
significant concerns that this proposed bill weakens community
voice.
We understand this government has said that these changes will make our system
more efficient, but we believe that efficiency shouldn't come at
the cost of democratic participation.
Our concern is that communities already face really significant barriers in
participating in current alcohol licensing processes.
We're worried about the cumulative effect of introducing additional tests and
barriers, particularly as a mana whenua
organization, working with whanau in our community, like
our kohanga, who already find these processes really difficult to navigate.
So to give you an example of the submission that Hiwa-i-Te-Rangi and
her kohanga did with us,
the process itself highlighted how difficult their participation was.
So they wanted to have a say. We worked with them.
They really were actively interested and involved.
We went there to present our submission together, and we
got there and the kohanga was advised that it would be best for them and their
whanau not to attend the hearing room because the council environment wasn't
set up for community participation, particularly for
young families. So instead, they were asked to wait outside
while us, as a few representatives, spoke on their behalf.
When we presented the concerns of the kohanga,
and for us as mana whenua with
active interest in that area,
we were asked questions like, "You represent a mana whenua organization.
How am I supposed to even know that you exist?" And that
experience, to speak to your point, that the question that you raised on
district boundaries,
the question that I have back to that is, what does this mean for mana whenua
organizations like ourselves, who are actively involved in these
communities, who have ancestral ties, who have tamariki, who
have whakapapa to Ngati Paoa, who are within these communities, but we
might not have a physical address there.
What will this bill mean for them and for us?
So that experience left us reflecting on how difficult it already
is for our whanau to have a say. People have to take time off work, arrange
childcare, navigate these unfamiliar processes.
So,
I guess this bill recognizes geography,
but our question is around also whakapapa as
well.
And
we drew on evidence within our submission, our written submission, that
this isn't a widespread problem in terms of irrelevant community
objection. Certainly in Auckland,
there's some evidence that shows that when 500 rejections
were reviewed, none were found to be irrelevant, and only two came
outside of Auckland.
Our second concern is around what this bill will mean for the increased
availability and normalization of alcohol.
We're already really concerned about introducing alcohol into everyday community
spaces like barbershops, and we've got really good relationships with
our barbers within our
community, and they've said to us that they don't want this.
For many Maori men, barbershops isn't just a business or
a place to get a haircut. They tell us that it's a place for
whakawhanaungatanga and for connection.
And one of our local barbers said this space is more
than just guys coming to get their monthly haircuts.
It's a place where they can talk and feel safe and be uplifted.
And so we should be protecting these spaces and not
normalizing alcohol within them.
Thirdly, this bill would disproportionately affect communities already
carrying the greatest burden of harm.
For a lot of the whanau that we work with, fetal alcohol spectrum
disorder is something that we see a lot, and
throughout our FASD and whanau support work, we're hearing directly from young
parents living with those challenges.
So to give you an example, at a recent FASD wananga that we
held at our community space, Te Whaipiringa in
GI, in Glen Innes in Tamaki, whanau spoke about alcohol being
much easier to access than counseling in that area, and
support during those difficult periods.
And to give you a quote, one of the mums said to us, "I was going through
a really hard time in my life when I was pregnant, but there was
three bottle stores within walking distance of where I lived, but counseling
was too expensive." So many of those whanau are thankfully
now on their healing journeys and working really hard to create healthier futures
for their tamariki and mokopuna. But we're concerned that this bill will make
their journeys
much harder by increasing the visibility, the accessibility, and
normalization of alcohol in everyday life.
So if the committee chooses to progress this bill, we
really urge that you retain those broad community rights to
object, that the previous submitter has spoken to, but that
there has to be more consideration for iwi and for hapu
like ourselves, who might not have a physical address
within that area, but has active interest.
And to the point around
if you don't live there but want to object and live within two
kilometers,
my question is, what does this mean for-- in the example I've given you of
her kohanga, we've got many whanau who, many
tamariki who live in multiple dwellings.
Some live in other suburbs because their parents might live elsewhere, but
they really wanted to have a say in that objection process.
So what would this mean for them? We also urge that you
protect local alcohol policies as an important expression of community
voice and local decision-making,
and look into those trading hours preventing further expansion into everyday
community spaces. So ultimately, we believe alcohol
policy should be guided by the well-being of our communities and not by the
convenience of the alcohol industrySo I'm willing to take
questions. We've got about three minutes, don't we?
All right. Hey, thanks, Lizzie. Right. Any questions from anyone?
Don't think so. Lizzie, why do you think that you-
Oh, there's a question.
Oh, sorry. I've got a question here.
Yeah.
Miss Kahu Carter.
Go ahead, Rachel.
Kia ora, Lizzie. Thank you so much.
I just wanted to say thank you for
speaking on behalf of Ngā Whare Maha.
I used to be a kaiako there, and my kids went there as well.
Ah.
So, lovely to see whānau.
So, in terms of the whānau living
outside
the territory or the one-kilometer zone,
do you think that
this should be opened up to the whole of
Aotearoa? Or what territories do you think that it should
be open to?
Well, I think it should be based on what the community feel, because I
just think, like in the instance of our whānau and
these tamariki, they live in multiple dwellings, and
it should be opened up.
Kia ora.
All right. Hey, thank you, Lizzie. I really appreciate you coming on this morning.
That's very nice. And it was a great presentation. Thank you.
Thank you.
Right. Now we're going to Clubs New Zealand.
Lucy,
are you with us, Lucy?
All right. Good morning.
Good morning. We're watching.
Good morning.
We are watching, and we've got 10 minutes with you.
Looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Brilliant. Thank you.
And
good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to appear today.
My name is Lucy Wateriss, Chief Executive of Clubs New Zealand.
We represent 300 clubs across the country,
ranging from small groups of a few dozen members
who might get together
a few times a week, through to large community hubs of
over 13,000 members.
Regardless of size, they are places where New Zealanders gather to
socialize, play sport, share meals, access
affordable entertainment, and find community.
Clubs New Zealand supports this bill.
We think it strikes the right balance between harm minimization and
practical improvements for responsible operators.
Clubs are generally low risk. They are member-governed, not
for profit, and deeply embedded within their communities.
That model naturally supports responsible service, and it is a
responsibility that we take seriously.
As always, I take our written submission as read, and in the
interest of time, want to focus today on why change is
needed, particularly for club licenses and special licenses.
The provision allowing clubs to choose between a club
license and a non-license introduces something that clubs have not
had in a very long time, and that is choice.
We strongly support this provision.
It provides a lawful and practical pathway for some
clubs to better meet community needs.
But it's important that it remains a genuine choice, and
not something that clubs feel pushed toward by reporting
agencies or because the existing settings are too
restrictive.
We do believe that clear transitional provisions
need to be included within the bill.
If a club chooses to move to a non-license,
it should be treated as a transition, not a new license, and
not a full reset. We do believe that its
compliance history should be retained.
While we strongly support
clubs having the opportunity to choose between a club license and a
non-license, we do believe that the underlying
issues are found within Section 60 of the act
itself, and they should be addressed as well.
In our view, Section 60 is the root cause of the many
challenges that clubs face today.
It restricts who a club can serve in ways that no
longer reflect how communities operate.
That, in turn, limits a club's ability to host events, attract
participation, and remain sustainable.
Clubs today are not exclusive and closed
environments. They are often the only venues for
community events, such as funerals, prize givings,
fundraisers, and local gatherings.
300,000 New Zealanders choose to belong to one or more of our
clubs, 4,000 people are employed within our clubs,
and more than 6,000 volunteers give their time
to our clubs every year.
Yet to meet community expectations, clubs are often forced
into what I would describe as complex workarounds of the law.
It is the restrictive nature of Section 60 that drives heavy
reliance on special licenses.
And I do want to be clear that clubs are not applying for special licenses
because they want to. They are doing so to meet community need and
to comply with the law. This often means applying for special
licenses for routine, low-risk events where alcohol is
incidental.
In some parts of the country, we've seen informal limits being applied
to how many special licenses a club can apply for in one
year. And you can just imagine the club
newsletter going out, asking people to please delay their funerals or
special occasions to the following year because the club
has hit its special license limit.
That sounds absurd to us, because it
is.While it may sound
macabre, funerals are actually a good example of where clubs
use special licenses. That they're regularly
hosting funerals for members of the club or the wider community,
and in many cases, the club is such an important part
of the member's life, it's where they choose to say farewell.
But funerals are not events that we book weeks in advance,
and the 20 working-day requirement for a special license is often
impractical. And while waivers exist, they come
with additional costs, and that adds stress
and cost at an already difficult time for people.
Another great example that I heard came from the House during the first reading
of the bill. There was discussion
around boating clubs needing special licenses for events like the Wotton Cup,
where one club hosts another and another club visits.
The issue here is not the participants in that boating event,
it's the
supporters, it's the family members, the friends, the wider community that turn
up to support the event. Those people are often not members
themselves of either clubs. So to remain
compliant, the club is left with little choice but to apply for a
special license to cover what is, in effect, a normal
community activity.
That is where the system becomes impractical because we're
requiring already licensed low-risk clubs to
repeatedly apply for special licenses for
events that we believe pose no additional risk.
We believe that there is a more practical approach through expanding the
definition of authorized visitor under Section 60 to
include any person attending a function or club event
similar to jurisdictions like Queensland.
Clubs are unique. We are not-for-profit, member-based
community venues. But we are not immune to the pressures
facing the wider hospitality sector.
In my role, I'm often asked why are clubs struggling, why are RSAs
folding.
And the reality is, there is no one single answer to that, but
perception plays a very big role. Imagine turning up
to a club for the first time, being faced with a closed door, a
doorbell, a swipe card access, a large members only
sign. I myself have been chased across a club by the
office lady. She was very well-intentioned, but asking me to sign the sign-in
book.
That is not welcoming, and it's a barrier before you've even stepped in the
door. But those barriers exist because clubs are trying to comply with
Section 60. At the same time, we
are trying to evolve. We have clubs trying to introduce new membership
categories. They are trying to be more open and accessible because
they know they need to attract new members to survive.
But too often those efforts are treated by reporting agencies with
suspicion, or they're interpreted as attempts to work around the law.
This creates a tension, and we need to rebalance the settings
so that clubs can genuinely welcome people in so that
becoming a member feels like a natural next step and not a
compliance exercise. Because ultimately, if clubs
cannot attract new members, they cannot remain sustainable.
And if they're not sustainable, then we lose that really important
community infrastructure that they provide.
So in summary,
we support this bill. We welcome the introduction of choice for clubs.
But we strongly encourage the committee to ensure that there are fair
transitional provisions for clubs that do choose a non-license.
Amend Section 60 to better reflect how clubs operate today
and address the practical realities of special licenses.
These changes would reduce unnecessary burden, improve
consistency, and ensure clubs can continue serving their communities in
a safe and responsible way. Thank you.
Hey, thanks, Lucy. Right. Questions, members? Right.
Koharangi Kaa has got one.
Thanks so much, Lucy.
I'm just interested to know, in those 300 clubs,
is it volunteers who are
actually serving alcohol to
members and their guests?
In some of them-
Some of them or all?
Yes, it is. It largely depends on the size of the
club.
Yeah.
So in
the club with 13,000 members that I mentioned,
they have paid staff that are all trained.
However, in those smaller clubs where it might only be a couple of hundred members,
then you're looking at volunteers.
However, those volunteers are still all trained.
There are roles within a club license where you don't
have to have a duty manager
on the premises at all times. However, we are
finding that that is becoming a default condition that's
placed on most club licenses.
Thank you. I just have another question, if that's all right, Mr. Chair.
Okay. Yeah.
So
whenever I go to a club, I always notice that the
alcohol's a lot cheaper than, say, a bar that's next
door or in the area. Have you ever looked
into
the difference in price between what's the price of
alcohol in a club
compared to the neighboring
or the
average of the same beverage?
We haven't
done
a full research into that. It's
a challenging one because I've actually had people
believe that there is a legal requirement for clubs to be cheaper
than other premises, which is simply not the
case. And so we are really encouraging clubs to look
closely at their pricing,
and make sure that they're actually meeting margins now, because clubs are
facing the same costs as other licensed
premises.
It's typically that they own their buildings.
They're not paying monthly rents.
But as I say, they still pay the breweries the
same price as any other licensed premise.
All right. Hey, thanks.
If there's time, can I do one more?
No. We're over time now.
Okay. Thank you.
Hey, thanks, Lizzie. I really appreciate that. Thank you very much. Right.
Now, we've got Alcohol Health Watch. I think we've got Andrew there.
And Lizzie Barrett, is she coming in by Zoom, Andrew?
We're both in person. Oh, you're here. Both of you. Good. Okay.
Fantastic. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Kia ora.
Tēnā koutou katoa. Ko Lizzie Barrett toku
ingoa. I'm a health promotion advisor making this submission on behalf of
Alcohol Health Watch. We're an independent NGO and peak body
in Aotearoa with a focus on preventing and reducing alcohol-related
harm by strengthening public policy.
I'm joined by our executive director, Andrew Galloway.
Firstly, we give credit to our colleague, Sarah Sneed, who outlined the
extensive evidence against most of this bill's proposed changes in our
written submission. As you know, we oppose these changes because
they prioritize reducing red tape for the alcohol industry over
people's rights to health and wellbeing.
Today, we'd like to emphasize our collective responsibility for a
reasonable and evidence-based approach to alcohol law reform.
This should involve balancing the harms the alcohol industry causes against their
ability to profit, keeping in mind that they do so through
strategies that both normalize alcohol throughout our society and
strategically profit off heavy drinking.
As you've already heard this morning, the industry amplifies the harms of social
disadvantage, including poverty, gendered violence, trauma,
social isolation, and stigma and discrimination, just to name a few.
These dynamics mean that alcohol harm is a health, social, and justice
issue with many different causes.
But we can do something about the predatory strategies that disproportionately harm
children, young people, and people with alcohol dependence.
Unfortunately, this bill doesn't align with the solutions that most New Zealanders
support.
Instead, we're concerned this bill will increase harm by increasing alcohol
availability, diminishing people's right to have a say over
alcohol-related issues in their area, and perversely increasing
red tape for local councils and district licensing committees.
The consequences of these changes, if enacted, would be felt by the friends,
whanau, and parents losing their loved ones, including their children, to
physical and mental health conditions.
The women and children experiencing alcohol-related violence.
The people living with lifelong disabilities such as fetal alcohol spectrum
disorder or impairments from alcohol-related accidents such as drunk
driving.
The bill's intentions don't just contradict the government-commissioned evidence on
harm reduction that's been repeated since the 2010 Law Commission review.
They're a slap in the face to the people experiencing the consequences of a
regulatory framework that drives lifelong, intergenerational, and
inequitable harms that ultimately impact all of us.
When alcohol is everywhere, these harms can and do happen to
anyone,
but it doesn't have to be this way. Most New Zealanders support strengthening
our alcohol regulations, and we want to be very clear that this doesn't mean
prohibition. Instead, it's about protecting our loved ones from harm.
And from the first day of submissions, we know even the alcohol industry agrees
with changes that could do so. For example, 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
opening hours and stronger online delivery regulations, including a
24-hour safety pause between ordering and
delivery. We also support the bill's proposal to
strengthen online sales and delivery protections.
And while it's a modest start, we'd like to emphasize that this should extend to
non-rapid delivery companies who mostly aren't checking IDs and are still
doing same-day deliveries. Today, we're asking you to
listen to the many people submitting on this bill who are brave enough to share
their experiences with you,
to value the knowledge and expertise that they've shared by taking it on board,
and ultimately, to prevent the harms this bill could cause to people's lives by
replacing it with the many other evidence-based, publicly supported
solutions that have been available to us for a long time,
including having higher standards for the alcohol industry lobbying and alcohol
sales and advertising, especially against strategies targeting
children, young people, and highly deprived communities.
Thank you for your time. We're happy to take questions.
Chair? Yes. Ms. Milich, Camilla.
Thank you. Hopefully, you can hear me.
Sorry to be online when you're there in person, but thank you so much for your
submission. I just had a question around
the impact that people who would be excluded from
objecting under this bill
currently have and the information that they may have available
to raise objections under the act.
So obviously, under these changes, there would be a
geographical limitation on people who could object, and I just wanted to know if
you had any evidence or experience of people who sat
outside these proposed geographic indicators who
provided valuable information when
licenses were being considered
That's an excellent question,
Member Bellich. Thank you.
We don't believe there should be any restriction on
proximity of objectors. There wasn't under the 2023
amendment, and we've done analysis nationally and locally in Tamaki
Makaurau, Auckland. The results are in our written submission, which show an
incredibly low number of licenses being refused.
It is not a feature overseas in the jurisdictions we were able to
find, and we haven't seen mischief that has, I
think, been,
you could say, mischievously alleged by the people who've brought this
bill.
We've seen people objecting for very good reason,
parents of children in Dunedin who want to see less
alcohol promotion, marketing, and advertising.
We've still got a parent of a child in Dunedin who perished, who died in
a
really tragic accident. You've got parents fronting up, Ben and Sarah Sims,
whose child tragically died last year,
very highly mediated and featured in Radio New Zealand and other
media. There really shouldn't be any reason for
limiting objections at all. That is our submission.
There hasn't been mischief from having it open to anyone.
It is in line with other jurisdictions, including most states in Australia,
the United Kingdom, and other like jurisdictions.
And to do so is simply giving in to what the alcohol industry want.
They don't want the
annoyance of having to respond. But this is a system, if you remember
at its principle, Sir Geoffrey Palmer and his team at the Law Commission
did a very extensive and evidence-based review, the results of which
came out in 2010,
and one of the biggest principles of this bill was to give communities
more say. That was repeated by the then Justice Minister,
Judith Collins, in a press release, saying this is about giving
communities more say. You are turning that principle on its head with
these changes. It's unnecessary.
There hasn't been the mischief that's been alleged by the architects of this bill,
and we reject the fact that there should be a limit on objections at all.
Right. Hey, thank you both to you, Andrew and Lizzie, for
that presentation this morning. Very good to hear from you.
Sure.
No problem. Now, we're going to the Cancer Society,
Rachel and Emma.
Good morning, both of you. We've got 10 minutes with you, as you
know. Looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Good morning. My name's Rachel Newman, and I'm joined here with
Emma Shields, and she'll speak after me as well.
We really appreciate the opportunity to come and present on behalf of the Cancer
Society today.
We're deeply concerned that the bill will increase
alcohol availability
through a range of changes that might appear in isolation
to be quite minor, but together will expand
access and further normalize alcohol in our
communities.
When availability increases, we know that harm
increases, and that includes cancer.
So alcohol is a well-established cause of at
least seven different types of cancer, and this includes
breast and bowel cancer.
There is no safe limit of alcohol consumption in
regards to cancer risk. And in New Zealand, cancer
causes 1,200 cases each year, and
these are entirely preventable cancer cases.
At the same time, we're facing a cancer crisis.
Currently, around 30,000 people are diagnosed with cancer every year.
But this has been projected to increase to more than
45,000 cancer cases every year.
And when you look at our health system,
it is already under significant strain in dealing with the
current 30,000 cases.
We also know that alcohol harm and alcohol-related cancers are not
evenly distributed in our communities.
Maori and those living in more deprived communities experience a
disproportionate burden of harm, worsening existing
inequities in cancer outcomes.
We also have strong evidence that increasing alcohol availability leads to
increased consumption, which will lead to increased cancer rates.
So we're left with an inconsistency.
On one hand, we have a government who's deeply committed to improving
cancer outcomes by investing hundreds of millions of dollars
in cancer medicines, lowering the bowel screening age,
and opening new линей machines. And on the other hand, we have this
bill that risks increasing our exposure to
a known carcinogen in our communities and increasing the number
of preventable cancers.
So from our perspective, we should all be aligned,
including the government, on cancer outcomes
and be taking every opportunity to reduce the number of new
cancers and not implementing changes that will
knowingly increase cancer rates in the future.
There is clear and consistent evidence that policies which reduce the
availability, the affordability, and the promotion of alcohol
are the most effective ways to reduce consumption and prevent
alcohol-related cancers. On the other hand, measures that
increase alcohol availability, such as expanding off licenses,
enabling alcohol in new settings, or limiting community
input into licensing decisions, will likely drive higher
consumption over time and lead to increased alcohol-related cancer
incidents.We are therefore very concerned with a number of the
proposed changes in this bill that may lead to greater alcohol
availability and consumption, and ultimately contribute to
these rising cancer rates in Aotearoa, which will impact families,
communities across the country, and as Rachael said, place further pressure on
our health system.
So we strongly reiterate our position that alcohol regulation in Aotearoa
should be strengthened, not weakened, to better protect the health of
everyone.
Ensuring that communities retain a meaningful voice in alcohol
decision-making, and limiting the widespread availability and
normalization of alcohol are critical components of this.
So thank you for your time today and for reading our written
submission, and we would be happy to take questions from the
committee.
Chair, I've got a question here.
Good. Kel, Mr. Bay.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks for the submission and thanks for the work that you do.
I'm a big supporter and big volunteer up in Whanganui.
Just on your argument, though, about alcohol consumption and
widening the availability of making things like off
licenses easier, et cetera. If you take that argument to its natural conclusion,
it's prohibition, and we know that that doesn't work, right?
Earlier this morning, we've heard from Clubs New Zealand about,
is the funeral going to be at this club or that venue or
whatever. Some of this is simply about making those processes more
practical,
and effective,
where we know that ultimately the funeral's going to be held somewhere and there's
going to be alcohol there.
So isn't there
a middle ground in some of your argument around some
of those issues that we're just trying to make simpler for the
volunteers across the country, like Clubs New Zealand, who
are trying to make events happen and
not be delayed unnecessarily or have long
run processes to get their licenses renewed?
Can I take that? All right.
So we do support
that administrative processes can be improved.
But the way the changes add up in this
lead to increased outlet density, increased amounts
of alcohol available in our community, and that doesn't align
with our objectives of reducing alcohol consumption across our
whole community and, in turn, our
developing cancer rates. And so
we are open to some of the changes in here that really
put better restrictions on different areas, like
looking more closely at delivery.
But I also question why do we have to have alcohol at every event
in New Zealand?
But surely, supplementary Chair, surely that's a choice for, for
example, the family that's deciding whether or not they want to host
an event at here or there, or a
family that's celebrating the life of a loved one.
Surely that's their choice to make.
I think
as we've submitted, alcohol is incredibly normalized in Aotearoa, and it's
incredibly available in a range of settings through that normalization.
And what we also know is, for example, most people aren't aware of the link between
alcohol and cancer. We have only about 18% of New Zealanders who know that
alcohol can cause cancer.
So we think that any change that will
increase that accessibility and availability leads to increased
normalization, and we want to try and make measures that will address
that. And I think to points made by Alcohol Healthwatch, that actually some of
these measures bring in even more regulatory burden on, for
example, councils. So having to check where people are based
brings an extra burden. So in other measures, I guess it's adding to
burdens as well. So...
Yeah. And adding to Emma's point,
the community isn't deeply informed
about the risks to cancer that alcohol poses.
And so I think we need to have much greater awareness in
our community before we can say that consumers have all the information to be
making an informed choice around alcohol.
Okay. Thank you.
All right. Hey, thank you to both of you for turning up in
person this morning. That was fantastic. Thank you.
Right. Now we're going to Lisa Riley by Zoom.
Have we got Lisa there from Lake Hawea?
Good morning.
Good morning. How are you?
Good. How are you?
Hopefully it's nice and warm down there. Now- ...
we've only got five minutes with you.
Yep.
Okay. Are you ready for me to begin?
Yeah, certainly.
Okay.
Tena koutou, and thank you for hearing me today.
My name is Lisa Riley. I'm a resident of Lake Hawea, a
parent, and a community activist.
I have also recently been through the alcohol licensing process as an objector in
my own community, and I have lived experience of the serious harm
alcohol can do inside families.
I also want to be clear I am not anti-alcohol.
Over the course of my life, my views on alcohol have been complex
and shaped by the circumstances of my life at the time.
But as I have aged, it has become clear to me the toll alcohol can
take on health, families, and communities, and how
much more openly those risks are now being discussed and
documented. I oppose this bill because it gets
both alcohol harm and community participation wrong.
When I talk about alcohol harm, I'm not speaking
abstractly.I grew up in an alcoholic home.
Some nights, my sibling and I barricaded our bedroom door because we were
frightened of how my father behaved when he came home from a night of
drinking.
I cannot overstate how stressful, chaotic,
unsafe, and deeply harmful it was for me to grow up
in that environment.
That is what hidden alcohol harm can look like for a
child,
and the cost of that harm does not end in
childhood. People carry it for years,
emotionally, financially, and
psychologically. That is why I do not
accept that this debate can be brushed aside by saying that most
people drink responsibly.
Even if many people do, that does not justify weakening
safeguards.
Most people drive responsibly too, but that does not mean we get rid of seatbelts,
speed limits, or drink-driving laws.
Safeguards exist because when harm occurs, other people pay for it
too.
In Lake Hāwea, we heard strong local evidence that alcohol harm and
vulnerability are real and present.
Evidence before our DLC referred to QLDC's 2024
Quality of Life Survey, which found that 25% of residents
had no disposable income and 4% could not meet
basic needs, with pressure falling heavily on younger women
caring for children. We heard that in the Upper Clutha Youth
Voice Survey, 67% of respondents age
11 to 18 had consumed alcohol,
33% reported binge drinking, and 31% reported
binge drinking at least monthly.
Psychologist Colin Goldthorpe told the DLC that in a review of one
year of his local private practice, 24 of 54
clients, 44%,
met the criteria for hazardous drinking.
Dr Wade Morris also told the DLC that alcohol harm had
increasingly aged up, with cases among people aged
25 to 54 and older adults rising sharply.
The effect alcohol harm is having on the very people raising children, holding
jobs, and paying mortgages is increasing.
That is the context in which this bill must be judged.
And yet this bill moves in exactly the wrong direction.
It makes it harder for communities to object, it weakens the real effect
of local alcohol policies, and it expands alcohol
availability in more places, more settings, and more hours.
It also moves in the wrong direction on participation.
The bill narrows who is even allowed to object and then gives
applicants an additional formal written response before the hearing,
which the committee must consider.
That's not making the process fairer for ordinary people.
It is narrowing community participation while strengthening the procedural
hand of applicants in a system that, quite frankly, already favors
them. In our own case, more than 540 people
objected, yet only a small fraction were realistically able to
appear and speak.
That is not evidence that others cared less.
It is evidence that the process is already too hard for ordinary people to
participate in, and this bill does nothing to fix that.
If the government genuinely wanted to improve alcohol regulation, it would
be focusing on different things. It would make participation easier,
not harder.
It would build a system ordinary people can actually use.
Digital first, but not digital only, with paper
versions available through councils and libraries.
It would strengthen alcohol delivery rules properly.
In my own recent experience, I was shocked by how easy it was to get alcohol
delivered with no proper age check at handover, even though the
retailer's own terms said it would not be left unless received by someone over
18.
This bill, to me, reads like an alcohol industry wish
list.
Yeah, right.
The industry gets the convenience, and the public pays the
cost.
Do it.
I ask the committee to reject this bill in its current form, or at the very least,
to remove the provisions that reduce community voice, weaken local
alcohol policies, and expand alcohol availability while leaving
the public to bear the harm.
Long living.
Thank you.
Right. We're just about out of time, I'm afraid.
Does anyone have a quick question?
I'll take one from Camilla.
Great.
Okay. One person can try to do it. Mine is-
Right. Camilla, you're up.
I think, sorry, I think Todd was up first, so apologies, Todd, for jumping in
ahead of you. Lisa, thank you very much for your very well-written
submission and extensive experience in this area.
I just had a quick question around,
there is a perception, I suppose, underlying the drafting of this
bill that the current community participation does prevent
businesses who want to participate in selling alcohol.
Just what's your response to that in terms of how effective these
community processes are that have the ability to
limit license applications being approved?
In my own personal experience,
they're completely ineffective in terms of allowing community
voice to be heard.
The process, the whole design of it, needs a
complete overhaul, and I would really welcome another review by the Law
Commission,
looking at things from the ground up again.
Okay. Todd, do you want a quick question or not?
No, thanks. Well, very quick. I just wanted to understand, Lisa, because obviously,
we've seen alcohol consumption continues to go down in New
Zealand.
So is it your submission that
it's really the,
I suppose, it's certain segments of our society that continue to have a
problem, or
I'm not aware of any study that's shown that consumption has gone down.
What are you referring-
Oh, I suggest you look at the latest New Zealand stats because
yeah, quarter on quarter consumption continues to go down.
But so it appeared to me you were talking about, I suppose,
particular demographics. You talked about young people, et cetera.
So I was just trying to tease out whether you think that-
Yeah. And I guess it goes back to the analogy I made about our
laws, our road rules. Why would we get rid of them
if we had a year where we had less deaths?
That just doesn't make sense.
Okay. Right. Hey, thank you, Lisa.
Nice to hear from you this morning.
You too.
All right.
Right now we've got Dr. Hewison.
I've got him twice. We've got him twice. Are you there, Mr.
Hewison?
How are we going, Anna?
Yeah, he's just answering.
Kia
ora.
Good morning. How are you?
Morning, sir.
So we've got you twice. You
obviously joined with your colleagues there as well.
How would you like to play it,
Grant?
Yes, Chair. I have a short sort of two or three minutes-
Okay, cool
... admission myself, and then we'll share it across a
number of us.
Fantastic. Thank you.
Thank you.
Well, tena koutou ko, Dr. Grant Hewison.
I'm a lawyer who acts regularly for communities who are
opposing the proliferation of alcohol premises,
particularly bottle stores across Aotearoa, New Zealand,
and you've just heard from one of my clients, Lisa Riley in Lake
Hāwea. So I'll be joining her in a week, and I hope the
weather improves.
So at the outset, I just wanted to make a really simple but important point,
which is despite its title, this bill does not improve
alcohol regulation.
In many respects, it does the exact opposite.
You've heard today, and you'll hear a lot about
the harm that's caused in Aotearoa, New Zealand from the sale
and supply of alcohol. So I won't labor that too much, but it
is deeply concerning
the scale of alcohol harm that we already experience in New Zealand.
We had 10 years ago or so the Law Commission recommend
some very significant changes to the legislation,
and unfortunately, this bill is taking us in the opposite direction.
I want to just talk first about the reintroduction of standing as a
restriction, and this is in sections 102 and 120, and
there's a number of other sections as well.
So this is the reintroduction of a restriction on where
you can object from. I'm especially concerned about
this being based on arbitrary geographic boundaries or
territorial authority boundaries, and I'm also very concerned
about the requirement for a certification process.
This will create new administrative burdens for licensing inspectors,
councils, applicants, and objectors.
Rather than simplifying the process, it risks generating
lengthy, drawn-out legal arguments over who is entitled to
participate, and applicants will pay through
their increased licensing fees. And for
what?
Less than 1% of applications draw any
objections at all,
and predominantly where objections are highest, it's
where there is a new bottle store trying to
enter into an area that typically already has a number
of bottle store outlets. So an increase essentially in
proliferation. And in my view, it's right that
communities are opposing the ongoing
proliferation of bottle stores in their communities.
Another reason was given that the Taupō District Council
received objections from people in Invercargill.
Well, we asked the Taupō District Council that question, and they said they had
never received an objection from Invercargill.
So people around the country objecting in places where they don't
reside or have an interest is also a fallacy.
In the past, we had long legal arguments drawn out
about the one- to two-kilometer restriction in that case or that
reintroduction of one kilometer the bill proposes.
Questions like, is that a radius where the crow flies?
Is it a road? How do you get from your residential address
to the premises? Is it by Google Map, or is it by whatever you think is
the most
easiest way? Is there a bridge or railway line in between?
Because that would sever any link.
And there were questions about where exactly you resided and where your office was.
It just created delay, and it created cost, particularly when there
were hundreds of objections that were being made.
The certification process is especially concerning because you will have
to offer up your private information,
your private address, information about where you live, and we've
seen applicants who have unfortunately received this kind of
information, send it on around their licensee
community or across to India, or just shared it
with other people publicly. So that
protection that currently is there that you don't have to share your
residential address, your privacy, is really important,
and we think it needs to be maintainedSo basically,
the removal of the previous standing requirement did not result in an
avalanche of people objecting from outside their
locality. On occasion, there were people who objected,
and Ms. Peka will talk about that from her perspective.
So this provision to reintroduce standing is just
unnecessary. I also wanted to just take the opportunity to look at
this issue of the statutory right of reply.
And again, this will introduce adversarial legalistic
arguments going back and forth. Agents and
lawyers are already writing long letters of reply.
So there's a right to reply to an objector, but introducing a
statutory right, particularly then linking it to
Section 202 of the Act, and where it
does, it'll force DLCs to look at the
question of whether an objection is vexatious
and essentially strike it out of the process on that basis.
And we're really concerned that there'll be an objection, a reply,
and then there'll be this decision that your objection doesn't hold
weight, and it's going to be labeled vexatious.
This is a really draconian
part of this proposal. No other legislation that has rights to
object includes then a process of calling an
objector vexatious. It'll just have a very chilling effect
on people making objections because their reputation will
then be
linked to them being labeled by a DLC, potentially
a vexatious objector. So we're very opposed to
that introduction of that requirement as well.
So that's all I wanted to focus on in terms of my personal
submission to you, but if there's any time, I'm very happy to answer any-
No, you're well over time limit. I think we should carry on with
your co-submitters. That'd be great.
Okay. Well, perhaps if I introduce Miriana Peka.
Miriana, would you like to speak?
Miriana Peka, Țōku ingoa. I am a member of
Communities Against Alcohol Harm
and the chair
of the Turihō Maori Warden.
Another reason CAAH is opposed to the reintroduction of
standing is that Maori communities
often maintain whakapapa, marae, and whanau
connections across multiple districts.
Alcohol harm is therefore not confined to
arbitrary territorial authority boundaries
or one-kilometer radius.
Restricting objections based only on
geography fails to reflect
the lived reality of Maori social organization,
where whanau may live elsewhere but retain
strong cultural, historical, and
intergenerational responsibilities to their
marae and home communities.
Whanaungatanga means harm experienced in
one community
affects
wider whanau networks through family violence,
addiction, and road trauma.
The proposed restrictions risk excluding iwi,
hapu, Maori Wardens, marae committee,
kaupapa Maori providers, and urban Maori
organizations with direct knowledge of
local conditions and alcohol-related harm.
Community objections from outside districts have been highly
significant and effective.
At Te Tiko, hundreds of people connected through
whakapapa and marae relationships
objected to a proposed bottle store.
At Mauria, near Rotorua, more than
1,000 people connected to the marae opposed
a grocery store alcohol license due to
concerns about complementary harm and
impacts on community well-being.
I myself have objected to a number of
applications in the Waikato where I whakapapa
to and do mahi, but I reside in Otara.
These examples show so-called non-local
objections are often deeply connected
community voices exercising
kaitiakitanga in accordance with tikanga.
Nga mihi.
Good.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Can I just ask,
Grant, I know, remember you've been a lawyer a long time ago.
The reading of the bill,
a number of submitters have made this assumption that there's a sort of this broad
limit of a one kilometer.
The understanding, I just want to check with you from a legal perspective,
because that is not the intent of the bill.
The bill is that within a region, like a council region,
anyone within that region can submit on a particular
application. The one kilometer applies if
the applicant is located very close to a
boundary. It provides a mechanism to extend it across,
for instance, a council boundary. Is that your reading of it?
Because that's not what it seemed to come through in the statements that you were
making.
I am concerned that you've got to get the
interpretation of what you're intending really clear with
these kinds of pieces of legislation.And we are
concerned that it could be read that you only have the
ability to object within one kilometer.
So I think as Parliament passes a bill, it needs to be very clear
that the idea is that if you're on a boundary and you
live one kilometer beyond the boundary of a territorial authority, but the liquor
store's just inside the other territorial authority, then you're
allowed to object. I would say, though, that one kilometer
is a very
short distance, particularly when it comes to rural communities.
So in a rural community, there might be some cows in the field at one
kilometer, but your house is
several kilometers beyond that. So I think you're
thinking about that from a very urban point of view, and one kilometer is even
narrow in an urban point of view.
But in a rural community, it could be some kilometers away
where people are affected. The other issue with one kilometer is, is it by the
crow flies, or is it by the way in which you get to it
by a road? So again, if you're in a rural community, you might have to go a
kilometer down the railway line to cross over the railway
line to come back to your property, which is within a kilometer, but by the
road, it's three kilometers.
Yeah.
So you're going to get those issues arising.
Yeah. Right. Make sure that's clear. Take your point.
Yeah.
Right. Camilla, last question.
Thank you. Thank you very much for your submissions this morning.
I just had a question around objections from outside the area and no
matter whether it's the
local board area or the local authority area or the one
kilometer
restriction, there's definitely a restriction on who can submit
in this particular bill. And my question was really around the information
around the applicant's suitableness, because we know that people
might have objections to
a new premises being in their local area.
But also, as I understand, the objections sometimes relate to the
individual or the group of individuals who are setting up that particular location.
Could you explain to me why it might be especially relevant
to have information about those
people from outside that geographic area?
Yes. So in a number of occasions, so that the Act, section
105, for example, looks at a range of criteria.
Amenity and good order, which is that kind of local effect, is just one of the
criteria, but suitability
of the applicant is a really important part of the criteria.
We've just had a
number of occasions where the suitability of the applicant isn't
known to those people who are local, but they may operate a liquor
store.
The application might be somewhere in Hamilton, but the store that they own is
in Auckland, and we do know that they've failed a controlled purchase
operation, sold to minors, been involved in
intoxication. Those sorts of things come up there.
And so it is important that that information can be
exchanged and can be brought to the attention of
DLCs. And sometimes people who live outside the
area are better equipped to say, "Well, look, I've had these experiences
with this applicant, and I want to bring this information to the hearing."
So yes, those issues around suitability can cross
over territorial authority boundaries.
Doable. Thank you.
All right. Thank you very much, all three of you, for your
presentation this morning. It was a very useful submission. Thank you for that.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair.
Right. We're going to Philippa Jamieson, who I think
is coming on board or about to, hopefully.
Kia ora. Can you hear me?
Okay, do you want me to go ahead?
Yeah.
I think we've just lost the Chair there, but-
Oh, okay.
That...
Shall I just go ahead?
Yeah.
Yeah, push on.
Kia ora. My name's Philippa Jamieson. Excuse my voice.
I thought I might ring in sick, but I'll do my best.
I am living in Ōhope Beach,
Whakatāne District,
and
my submission was quite short.
Basically, this bill is not needed.
It weakens our already liberal laws governing the sale and supply
of alcohol.
And some of the points are restricting objections
to liquor outlets and so on
weakens democracy,
and also the one kilometer restriction, which I heard the Chair say is
not what most people have interpreted as.
Well, I interpreted it that way,
and I thought it was pretty ridiculous since
obviously alcohol can be transported or the harms can be
transported well outside of
that area.
And basically, in terms of objecting, I think community and
public health voices must have more weight than the
liquor industry
for the good of our community as a whole.
Some aspects of the bill,
such as allowing alcohol in hair salons, would further
normalize alcohol use. There's just no need for it.
I'm also alarmed about the proposal to allow delivery services to
check whether the recipient of the alcohol delivery is not a minor
and not intoxicated.
They're supposed to already, I think, but
this is opening up a level of risk, particularly to youth,
and again, is normalizing alcohol.
Given that alcohol is a legal drug with no known
safe lower dose, think cancer, think fetal
alcohol syndromeYour duty as responsible
lawmakers is to minimize harm to the community, and indeed, that is
in the object of the bill. It remains so in
the act and remains so in the bill.
Not only is there heartbreaking damage from alcohol use to
individuals, families, and communities, this is also reflected
in the massive economic cost to our country to the tune of
$9.1 billion a year.
Alcohol puts a huge
strain on our economy, to our health system, justice,
police, corrections, overall workplace
productivity, and more.
So to be responsible stewards of our money and our society,
please reject this bill that would only increase risks to
people and the economy.
Thanks. I welcome any questions.
Yeah, thank you. Now, members, any questions
for Philippa?
Don't think so. Hey, thank you. We've obviously got a lot of submissions today, but
thank you for making the time to come in, and hopefully the weather's good
down where you are, Elsey Beach.
All right.
Yeah. Thank you.
Hey, thank you very much, Philippa. Okay.
Hey, now we've got Robert Baker.
Kia ora. Can everyone see and hear me?
How are you going? We've got five minutes with you, Robert.
Fantastic. Well, then I'll get straight to the point. So kia ora.
Ko Robert toku ingoa. Ko Whakatohō.
I'm thankful for the opportunity to speak to you all this morning.
I would love to have done so in person.
Thankfully, technology allows me to make this submission even though I
don't live in Wellington,
something I'm sure
many people wonder they will be able to do in the future if this bill continues.
I work in health promotion, specifically in the addiction space.
My role is to educate, develop, and support our local communities, education
providers, and health services, encouraging better health outcomes for our young
people. Work I'm sure we can all agree is vitally important to
the fabric of our society. We want our young people to flourish, but we also want
socially conscious, politically active communities
that are given the tools and the knowledge necessary to enact meaningful
change within their own elective local government.
Yet when I look at this bill, I fail to see how any alleged positive
impacts outweigh the obvious harm that this bill will enact.
It weakens the protections for our most vulnerable communities, but it also erodes
the democratic rights of all New Zealanders.
Last year, and I apologize, I'm sure that you're hearing these numbers a lot, but I
will say them again. 4,666 licenses
were given out. Of those, 19 were
contested, and nine of them went to public
hearings, and they all still received their licenses.
I couldn't find the exact number of bills that were declined.
However, most people seem to agree that it's less than
half a percent, so that's roughly 23-ish
declined applications.
This bill aims to unleash New Zealanders and businesses from the stranglehold
of red tape. I'm sorry. If we're to believe that 20-something declined
applications is a stranglehold on the alcohol community,
I've got a fairy I'd love to sell you guys.
Research continues to uncover the
ongoing, and often unrecognized harm of alcohol and its
normalization in our society. As the last speaker shared, there is
now widely recognized no safe amount of alcohol that can be
consumed. It accelerates significantly the chance of risks
to your health after even one drink.
I do agree with Minister Mackey. Alcohol is a legal product
that the vast majority of New Zealanders consume responsibly.
She did fail to mention that the vast majority of New Zealanders
consuming this legal product
also contribute $9.1 billion of harm to our economy.
So look, that's a lot of money
that we could spend on fairies. I don't know. Apologies.
Look, my work revolves around rangatahi, our most vulnerable, and for many of them,
they feel the effects of outdated, ill-conceived, or poorly worded
laws more than most, and they aren't even the ones buying the alcohol.
They have no power to vote, take no civic action, or challenge their
father's rugby club to make a sports field alcohol-free.
They rely on us,
on me and you, to make good law and follow it.
If this law aims to unleash New Zealand, unleash to what?
We already consume 442 million liters of
alcohol a year. That's enough to float a fairy.
Okay, I won't make any more fairy jokes.
Personally, I do have to agree with Minister Seymour.
He says, "In a free society, adults should be trusted to make their own choices.
The role of law
is to target harm, not to micromanage responsible behavior." He's absolutely
right.
Which does raise the question: Why does this amendment wish to take away the
democratic rights of New Zealanders?
If it passed, this bill will remove the ability for Kiwis to have a say on license
applications outside of where they live
and work,
and prevent local government from effectively passing or using their own alcohol
policies. If in a free society adults should be trusted to make their
own decisions,
why defang local government? And why remove the ability of
New Zealanders to speak about their own communities?
We have 67 licensing districts in New Zealand.
For a large portion of New Zealanders, they will move between multiple territories
daily. Parents in the Manawatū will work in Palmerston, drop their kids off
and pick them up from school, return home to Foxton.
So do families in Rodney, Huntly, the Hutt Valley, the list goes on,
and they will lose the right to have a say in what happens down the road from their
child's school.
My hometown of Nelson borders Tasman's largest settlement, Richmond.
You would never know that you had driven from one area to another, let alone from
one legal district.New Zealanders cross these boundaries every day to
work, shop, have school, see friends, play sport, go to church, visit the
beach.
Under this bill, they will lose the right to object to what they can currently
call objectionable. They will also lose their democratic right to have a
voice in the communities that they are part of.
We've already heard before, and I would like to reiterate,
the wording of this bill is so vague.
I've read on it, I've attended two seminars on it, and
no one is actually able to confirm whether I will be able to make
a submission in my own licensing district if I live more than one
kilometer away from the premises.
The fact that we're discussing this here shows that it has been poorly
worded.
I am sympathetic to event organizers and those hopeful of obtaining a
license. They should, however, be granted these licenses because they are
planned well, they've done the work,
and they offer a civic benefit, not because those wishing to
object cannot.
Thank you for your time.
Okay. Well, thank you,
Robert, for a very entertaining but very pertinent
presentation.
Can't all be stuffing.
Nothing was misleading, as you suggest. But enjoy.
Have a great day, mate. We went over time, but thank you very much.
Cheers, guys. Thank you very much.
Right. Now we've got Carolyn and Denise from Retail New
Zealand in person, hopefully.
Yes. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Good morning to both of you. We've got 10 minutes with you.
You're both very experienced at doing this, so the floor is
yours.
Look, mōrena, Chair. Thank you very much.
Great to have Carl here in his yellow and black supporting the 'Canes for tomorrow
as well.
He's a Trojan.
Go 'Canes is the first thing we'll say.
Make sure that we're all supporting the right team.
Look,
Retail NZ, obviously we represent
businesses that are licensed and regulated
operators of selling alcohol, and just want to reemphasize a
point that has been made with some previous
submitters, that alcohol is a legal product that you
can buy. It's controlled through some licensing and regulations.
We support businesses that comply to those
regulations. We're not talking about wanting anyone to breach those or
have any changes to the
ability to sell in the appropriate manner.
And so if somebody is compliant with the
regulations, we would think it should be a fairly straightforward process for them
to have their license application reissued upon
expiry. And so one of the things we really wanted to
emphasize is that, we have to remember that it is a licensed product.
You are able to buy and sell alcohol, and people are able to consume
it
within the bounds of the law, and that's what we support.
And so with these changes, there are some things, and we're pretty clear
that the draft says that
the people who can
object are either in the licensing
district or within one kilometer of the applicant space.
So I think, from our perspective, our reading of it seemed pretty
clear. But anyway, Denise, I'll hand over to you.
Yeah, I think
as Carolyn says, we're largely supportive of what this
bill is trying to achieve. There's just a couple
of points that our members kind of wanted to highlight.
One
around the rapid delivery of alcohol and
where the liability lies. Retailers will do
do and will continue to do all they can to ensure they're selling to
people who are of age and not intoxicated.
But under the rapid delivery space that we now find
ourselves in, this law doesn't seem, or this bill doesn't seem to
attribute any liability on delivery of the
goods, which is often put out to a third party, that
the requirement must be also on that person to ensure that they are
of legal drinking age, not intoxicated, and therefore
liable
for penalties as well as outlined in this law.
So that's just one point of clarification that our members wanted to highlight.
And another was around
the provision of some restaurants being able to
hold off licenses. There's concern around the fact that
some districts have quite
strict provisions on the number of
alcohol retailers in an area,
and A, this could increase harm in those areas where there
is quite a
specific need to keep those shorter, smaller.
And also limits potential competition and other
retailers from setting up in that space.
So those were just another couple of things that our members want us to highlight
to you.
Chair, if I can ask a question?
Yep. You can go, Carl.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks, Carolyn, for joining us face to face.
You made the point about the one kilometer, and there's been some commentary about
that this morning. So in your mind, it's pretty clear that it's one kilometer from
the point as though you draw a circle and a radius.
How else would you measure it?
Yeah, it's in the same licensing district or within one
kilometer of the applicant's premises.
So that would cover that cross-border piece that one or two of the other
submitters had mentioned.
But we've had some, this morning, commentary that it might be a
kilometer on Google versus a kilometer as the
crow flies versus a kilometer if you use iMaps, which might be
different.
Yes. So the bill might need-
And it just sounded like you were pretty clear.
Yeah. So the bill might need to be more specific about how that's measured.
Okay.
But these days we use technology. Google's pretty popular,
right?
Yeah.
So I guess if you're thinking, is it a kilometer as the crow flies
versus a kilometer to get there on a windy street, which could-
Okay
... actually only be 500 meters, so maybe clarify that perspective.
But other than that, it seems pretty straightforward.
Cool. Okay. No, that's helpful. Thank you.
Yep. Thank you.
All right. Camilla, a question for you from me.
Thank you. There's-Obviously, one of the key issues that have
been raised by submitters in this is the restriction on who can object to
a licensee. And I understand there may have been some
concerns raised by some of your members around this, but it appears that there's a
lot of evidence to suggest that this isn't
stopping licenses super regularly.
But my question really was, with the restrictions, especially in
relation to the applicant who's opening
a new premise,
wouldn't it be
preferable for your membership for any concerns
around their history or their character to be able to be
raised before the license is granted by anyone, anywhere?
Because surely the worst position for
retailers is to have kind of bad eggs in there
showing up the rest of the good,
mostly 99%, excellently
responsible providers. So I just wondered if you could-
Yeah
... comment.
I think two things. I'll just start with that, and Denise, jump in if there's
anything else. So the first thing I'd say, I think there's sometimes a distinction
between a new applicant and re-licensing.
So if you're thinking about a new applicant, understanding
that individuals, their owner's
reputation, I guess, and their ability that they haven't making sure that
they've complied in other jurisdictions and they haven't got
any marks against their name somewhere else,
would probably be useful in terms of that new
application. But for
renewals of licenses,
we have seen instances where a lot of
people from outside of the areas have put in objections which
have caused really extensive and long
protracted processes and expensive processes to get
re-licensed. So I think there's a slight differential in how you could
think about the re-licensing versus a new application.
So yeah, you want to be clear about that the person getting
a new license, to your point, is in that 99.9%
category, and but for the re-licensing, that we're not
having people outside of the area litigating a business
that's been in place for 20 years and causing great cost to that
business to get a re-license when actually, the people that
are making objections are not within that area.
So just on extending Camilla's question.
Presumably if you're a new license,
an applicant applying for a new license altogether, right?
Not a renewal, taking your point.
Wouldn't it be form part of the information that the council would
request of a new applicant?
Do you have enough detailed understanding of that to give us a view on that
or not?
You would expect with a license and regulated premises that that's what the council
would be doing. But I guess,
we'd really need to find out how much due diligence the council do.
How would we find that out? Would you be able to-
Yeah, we can come back to the committee.
Yeah. Could you do that? Because I think the point is very
valid what Camilla's saying.
And I-
Yeah
... sorry, Chair. I'd just jump in there that I do know that
often police will
object to some licenses, and as we know,
information sharing amongst our police forces is
very good. If there is a new applicant in a different jurisdiction
who has had issues in complying with those laws, that
we would expect police to know about that and bring that to the
attention of the relevant liquor licensed area
that they're now applying for.
Okay. If you can help us with that.
But we'll double-check and come back to you.
Yeah. Okay. Cool. Right. Hey, thank you to both of you again.
You're regular submitters,
and nice to hear from you.
Thanks, Chair.
Thank you.
Right. Now we've got Dr. Katie Benn
hopefully with us on Zoom.
Katie, if you're there, please jump on.
Kia ora. I am here.
Kia ora.
I'm just trying to turn my camera on.
Right. Cool. We've got 10 minutes with you, Katie. How are you?
Good, thank you. Kia ora. I'm Katie Benn.
I'm here on behalf of Te Mata Houro, which is the Association of Salaried Medical
Specialists, and we represent more than 6,000 senior doctors and
dentists across the health system.
And I'm also an anesthetist based at Nelson Hospital.
We've put in a written submission which covers our concerns about the regulatory
and democratic problems that we see with this bill.
So I'm going to take that as read. But what I want to do is have a chat about what
this bill means for a frontline practicing clinician.
And I'm going to start up by saying that we are requesting that the committee
decline to progress this bill. The more available the
alcohol is, the more that harm will follow.
If there are more outlets and longer hours, we normalize the consumption of alcohol
into the fabric of everyday life, then we get increased consumption and the rate of
alcohol harm will go up accordingly.
And you see this every night on call.
We get victims of assaults that come in with fractured faces, fractured hands.
They go onto the acutes list the next day.
That adds to our acute workload, but it also pushes out the waiting times
for other acute inpatient treatment that's not alcohol-related.
It can result in the fact that people who have been waiting for some time on an
elective list for a life-changing thing, like a knee or a hip replacement,
get canceled because there's just too much acute trauma, most of which is
alcohol-related.
If a patient comes into the emergency department with head injuries associated with
alcohol ingestion, they have a reduced conscious level, they're not
cooperative with examination. We've got to get them through a CT scanner to make
sure they don't have any intracranial bleedingWe've got one anesthetist
and one tech in Nelson Hospital. If we are
sedating, intubating, and taking a patient through the CT scanner,
we're not there for the woman that needs an emergency caesarean section to save the
life of her or her unborn baby,
and that is critical alcohol harm impacting on other people.
We know we're practicing in an environment of reduced resources.
We know that this bill will mean our resources are stretched even thinner with the
increased workload that you get with alcohol harm.
We also have drink-driving to consider.
Rural clubs, which will then become essentially bars, are often in places where
there is no public transport or limited access to taxis or rideshare
services, so the only way to get home is to drive your car.
And these places are often the furthest away from an emergency department or a
trauma team.
In Nelson Tasman, we've got 42 licensed clubs.
In the Nelson Tasman Marlborough region, that increases to 70.
If they all suddenly become bars overnight, we will stress our hospitals
that are already stretched to the limit in terms of staffing and
beds. We know that alcohol accounts for one in nine ED
presentations. It accounts for 30,000 hospital admissions and
130,000 ACC claims every
year. The societal cost, I'm sure you've already heard, but I'm going to reiterate
it, is over $9 billion.
That's set against $1.9 billion that it contributes to our
GDP.
If you expand access to alcohol, we'll get more ED presentations with
alcohol-related injury, and we'll get more people presenting with
cancer and needing chemotherapy and cancer surgery.
Alcohol is a known carcinogen. It contributes around
900 deaths and 1,250 cancers in this country
every year.
Breast cancer,
predominantly female breast cancer,
comprised 61% of alcohol attributable deaths in
women, and more than a third of those were associated with what
is considered to be moderate intake only.
7% of our whole cancer burden in New Zealand is attributable to alcohol
use.
Cancer mortality is twice as high for Maori as for non-Maori,
and the most recent New Zealand study showed that of the 900-odd deaths
that are attributed to alcohol, 42% were because of
cancer. So this has a massive impact on our waiting times and on our
treatment times for other conditions.
We're also concerned that the harm is not evenly distributed, so more than half of
the $9 billion of cost comes from fetal alcohol spectrum disorder,
which is entirely preventable, and which falls disproportionately
on our whanau who are already under pressure.
Maori are twice as likely to die from an alcohol-related cause as
non-Maori.
Children in New Zealand see alcohol marketing four to five times a day
on average. Maori children see it five times more than Pakeha children.
And the zero alcohol display provision, which looks like a minor technical
amendment in the bill, will actually make it a lot worse.
It will authorize branded displays of zero alcohol products that are
visually indistinguishable from the real thing.
So if you've got a wall of Heineken 0%, what you're actually advertising is
Heineken,
in an aisle setting which exposes our children and our people with alcohol
addiction problems who may be in recovery.
Aisle setting further exposes these people to more alcohol
marketing.
And when it comes to children,
frontline clinician experience, I've had to resuscitate
14-year-olds who have come in so unconscious from
alcohol intoxication that they need to be put on life support overnight.
I've had to look after children younger than 14 who've come in so intoxicated with
alcohol that they can't protect their airways.
That means when they vomit, because you do with an alcohol overdose, it trickles
down into your lungs, and it causes acid burns.
They can need to be on life support for some time.
Exposure to alcohol messaging will turn into consumption, and that will turn into
harm.
Katie, just get-
I want to protect our families
... just come to some questions for you.
Okay. Basically, we are asking for the committee to decline to progress the
bill,
and if you're going to change alcohol regulation, change it in the direction that
the evidence points and that the public supports.
Okay. First question, Todd Stevenson.
Hi, Katie. Thanks for your submission.
Look, just want to talk to you a bit about the zero alcohol
products being with the alcohol products, say, in a supermarket, which is what this
bill allows.
Yeah.
Don't you think that would...
I mean, the other way to look at it is people could then make a,
maybe a
non-alcoholic option,
because we've got this kind of situation at the moment where the non-alcoholic
products can't be anywhere near the alcoholic products.
So,
do you not think that the other possibility is people could make a different choice
in that moment?
People can already make a different choice because they know the zero alcohol stuff
exists, and it is elsewhere in the supermarket.
The issue is not that the choice is there.
The issue is that it is essentially advertising the non-zero.
So you've got-
But that doesn't change-
You've got identical branding. It's still advertising.
Right.
And it advertises the full strength product, which then exposes our kids and
our people in recovery to advertising for the full strength product.
Right. So then really your submission is that we should do something about
advertising.
We should do something about both.
Okay. Thank you.
Can I just, on your
report, your submission-
Yeah
... you talked about the 1,200 instances of violent crime
victimization annually, and if it was reduced,
if the off-license hours were reduced by one
hour, then that would be the result.
Do you know the background to that stat
in your report, or is that,
that's just one that's come from the Justice Ministry?
I can find that out for you. My understanding is that when late-night alcohol
sales were restricted, we saw an 11% reduction in ED presentations with
assaults.But I can find the actual source for that for you.
And so you've obviously put it in there.
Do you have a view
from your experience as a doctor, do you
see a lot more results of
victimisation, alcohol related crime
late at night in the last sort of hour or is that anecdotal?
From a very personalised viewpoint, alcohol calm presents
seven days a week. It does present predominantly at
closing time and in the early hours of the morning.
That would often result in the person needing to be hospitalised and using up an
inpatient bed overnight because the problems aren't often severe enough to need
treatment that night, but they do need an inpatient stay
until such time as we can fit them onto an acute list.
Okay.
So even if they come in
at closing time, early hours of the morning, they're then using up an inpatient bed
that we ideally need to give to somebody else and that impacts on our ability to
provide elective treatment the next day.
Yeah. No, well, we heard that point earlier.
What I was trying to ask is around the hours of operation
of the off license and the session and
you put it in your report, just the facts around that. But okay, that's cool.
Generally, reduction in consumption reduces the harms and the
presentations we see.
Okay. Hey, thank you very much. Really appreciate you coming on this morning.
Thanks for your time.
Cool. Right now, we're going to Maori Women's
Welfare League by Zoom.
How we going, Anna? We got everyone here?
She's done.
If you hear from the Maori Women's Welfare League.
Kia ora.
Hi. How are you?
Kia ora. Aroha mai. I don't know why I... Oh, there it is. Just bear with me.
All right, cool. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Ka pai. Kia ora.
Okay. Ka pai.
Ata mārie. Mauri tū, mauri ora,
mauri tai ki a tātou katoa. Tēnā
koutou e te committee. Ko Harata Franks tāku ingoa.
Te rōpū Wāhine Māori Tautoko. E te ora
Madam Member, mō te Ōtautahi peka ki
te Waipounamu.
I'd like to acknowledge, I'm hoping that our Madam
Branch President, oh sorry, Madam National
President of the Maori Women's Welfare League, Dr.
Hope Tupara is online. If she is, she
is-
Great
...
here to tautoko us from her whare in the north.
I will be speaking to the league's submission on our
behalf. So,
once again, morena koutou. It's lovely to hear
everybody's submissions that have already been put in.
I just want to alliterate pretty much what's already
been said. But traditionally, Maori were the very
few societies worldwide that did not consume
intoxicants.
When introduced to alcohol by
European settlers in the 19th century, our tupuna
immediately recognized its destruction
potential. They labeled it waipiro,
stinky or foul water, and
waikaha, strong water.
By naming it waipiro, stinky water, our tupuna
identified its foul nature and lack of
mauri, life force or nutritional value.
Throughout the 19th century, rangatira
petitioned the government directly to
prevent alcohol from destroying their
communities. In 1856,
leaders from Ngati
Mahuta sent letters asking for drink to be kept from them.
In 1866, six Arawa
rangatira petitioned the House of Representatives,
requi- sorry. Oh, me nose has started running. I wonder what that's about.
It's my tupuna saying, "Come on, Harata, hurry up," requesting
no liquor licenses to be allowed on their land, and in
1879, Te Waipounamu iwi
petitioned for total ban in Te Waipounamu.
So what I'm saying is that our rangatira Maori were concerned
about the impact of alcohol on their communities and
took steps to prevent its spread and use.
Hapu would declare their communities or marae
dry and control access to liquor.
In 1884, Ngati Maniapoto convinced
the government to declare the entire
Rohe Potae King Country as a dry area,
the largest in Aotearoa, New Zealand.
And here we are today, tēnei rā,
170 years later, doing the same thing
as our tupuna. We are here to enforce the
voices of our tupuna, our iwi, our hapu, our
whanau and our hapori. The Maori Women's Welfare
League are here today to let you know that we oppose the
Sale and Supply of Alcohol Amendment Bill.
He aha ai? Why?
Kotahi.
The people of our community should have a greater say about their
community. The league strongly
supports objections to licensing applications
coming from local communities. They should be
the ones at the deciding table, and
thisIntention is only being
authentically as long as the
participation is not limited to barriers, which we're
hearing a lot of this morning, including costs, transport,
geographics, restrictions, boundary lines that cut
up the geographics where they live, or the
over-subscribing of license applications
where they cannot keep up. Rua. The league
strongly opposes allowing hairdressers or barbers to
supply small amount or any amount of
alcohol to customers without a license.
This is only extending places where alcohol is
normalized. Toru. The league does not believe
that the
Governor General should be rubber stamping alcohol
premises such as proposed for standalone
license
exemptions for clubs, online premises where
televising
significant events outside of usual
trading hours. The Governor General should not be
involved in supplying licenses for alcohol,
which is known to cause harm. Whā. The
league is opposed of alcohol advertising and increase
alcohol
access across clubs, restaurants,
supermarkets and grocery stores.
We raise the challenge of verifying
and preventing alcohol sales to intoxicated
and underage people.
So coming pretty much to wind this up,
is Waipiro alcohol a public health issue
in Aotearoa, New Zealand? We are hearing from
many this morning, aye, yes. Alcohol is a
major
public health issue in Aotearoa, New Zealand.
It ranks among the leading causes of preventable
deaths and contributes, we've already heard, to roughly
9.1 billion annually in social
costs,
including health, ACC,
and the justice system expenses.
Here is my question. Here is my question to the committee.
Why do you think that it's a good idea to normalize
alcohol more? Why do you think,
and who do you think this would
benefit? Because it's definitely not going to
benefit our mokopuna,
benefit or definitely not our future
generations. Alcohol is
dramatically harming so many people in our
communities and in our country that we should
and we need to deformalize alcohol and
avoid funding the alcohol industry.
What is the best way that we can do this?
It's very simple. Stop normalizing alcohol.
In conclusion, committee, we strongly
recommend that you reject the Sale
and Supply of Alcohol Amendment Bill.
Nga mihi nui ki a koutou te committee for
listening to our concerns and to listening to all of us that
have concerns about this. No reira, tena
koutou, tena koutou, tena tatou katoa.
He patai koutou.
Any questions?
Right. Good. Thank you very much. Right, members, any questions?
Yes, I've got one from Camilla.
Kia ora, Camilla.
Kia ora. Tena koe. Thank you for your submission today.
Kia ora.
I just had a question around an issue that has been raised a
bit with the committee, which is when people have
whakapapa routes to certain areas, this bill would prevent
them objecting if they didn't
currently live within the geographical boundary or within one kilometer.
So I just wanted to ask you if you had any examples of
when people may want to submit, if they did have that
connection to an area.
Oh, kia ora, Camilla. That's a very
thoughtful
patai to be asking. Once again, we need to
know. We need to know when these things are happening.
There should be obviously an opportunity where we
can Zoom or where we can actually come together,
as a whanau, as a hapori.
And
I just think the best way, it's around communication.
And if anything, it's about taking out these limitations that we
are facing.
I hope that's answered your patai. Kia ora.
It has. Kia ora. Thank you.
All right. Hey, thank you very much for joining us this morning.
You're so welcome. Kia ora.
And thank you for that. That's great.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we've got Benjamin and Sarah, who I now
understand are going to come together
for a 10-minute session.
Benjamin and Sarah, if you're there, that'd be great.
Can you hear us?
Yeah. Good morning. I understand now you're both going to
do it jointly, so we've got 10 minutes with you.
Yes. Yeah.
Good.
I'm not sure if our video's working.
So-
No, it's not. But we can hear you at leastThere you are.
Good. Right. Let's rip into it.
Morning.
Right.
First, I'd like to say two things.
I don't accept the labeling of these amendments as harm reduction.
Six of the seven changes benefit businesses.
I am not anti-business or alcohol industry, but we need more guardrails.
Laws are meant to protect our people, our children, who we know, and the research
shows, need protecting from others and from themselves.
Our family, among others, is living proof of this.
Silas, among others, is dead proof of this.
From the moment he was sold a 700-milliliter bottle of spirits, he didn't
stand a chance.
I call for Challenge 25 to be made law with serious immediate consequences for
breaching it, along with my other recommendations.
I now hand over to Sarah, Silas' mom.
Thanks, Ben. We're speaking to you today as one of the few
families to have provided a victim impact statement on the proceedings under the
Sale and Supply of Alcohol Act. This is not because offenses are
rare, it's because this legislation is seldom used to
address the real-world offending.
In our view, that is a result of both systemic and cultural factors.
After 11 months watching this system, we've seen a high-trust regime
with limited enforcement, little compliance testing, almost
no risk mitigation. There's no central police oversight, little
parliamentary scrutiny, limited use of independent risk data,
and no compulsory training standards.
Regulatory largely focuses on appeals, audits, density
classifications, and advertising.
When alcohol laws are broken, the policy response is a future sting
operation rather than investigation,
at least in Auckland.
Even when breaches are admitted, the policy remedies are
conversations, prompts, and additional signage.
There is little sector-wide education, no routine testing of intoxication
management or Challenge 25 compliance, little use of modern
tech, and modern evidence isn't gathered.
The result is predictable. Very few prosecutions, very little case
law, and a system where judges are left explaining the basics during hearings.
And where consequences are imposed by ILWA, they're effectively minimal for
salespeople. The policy is servers aren't prosecuted for public
interest sake. A duty manager may lose their name on the whiteboard for a
few weeks but is still making sales.
A business may receive a temporary suspension or cancellation, play it as a
renovation, or sell the business at a discounted profit.
But none of this money goes to the taxpayer, and yet by our
estimate, our son's death has had direct public sector
costs of about $200,000 so
far.
The deeper issue is disconnected at regulation and industry
level between the two core purposes of this legislation,
minimizing harm and the two offenses of serving minors and the
intoxicated. What I hope the judge demonstrated by
allowing our statement is these offenses cause real harm.
These crimes are what must be deterred.
Unfortunately, that same disconnect exists well beyond our
case. While the duty managers and servers were the primary failure that
night, there were also big failures by the teams involved,
by licensors, payment providers, and banks that should have
recognized the pattern of potential fraud.
Deterrence for these groups already exists in this
legislation. The problem is we don't use this to protect our
young or the drunk.
Recently, Ben stood in the petitions committee advocating for a practical
barrier to prevent the sale of restricted products to minors through bank blocks,
something already done for corporate clients.
The response from New Zealand Banking Association was familiar, "It
won't stop the kids anyway."
That culture seems to run through the country.
It becomes the reason not to regulate, not to enforce.
We disagree.
More layers would have stopped the kids that day.
These minors would not have obtained 62 units of alcohol in three
hours from family and friends around cars and while intoxicated.
And if six adults had knowingly supplied them, with the evidence
we had, they would've been up for fines
and a criminal record.
The application of these laws is how culture changes.
So what are other jurisdictions doing?
In New South Wales, licensing decisions operate on civil standard of
proof. They publish local independent data on drink driving,
violence, and last known place of drinking, density, and
supply. That information is incorporated into publications,
conditions, and decisions, allowing all to understand the pros
and the cons. Businesses pay 100% of their
regulatory and compliance costs.
In New Zealand, we publish business types, menus,
floor plans, and opening hours. This is our graduated national
formula for risk. We factor in CPO failures, but we
basically don't do them.
We rely on 63 councils with separate policies and lengthy local
hearings to determine these appeals, insisting on near criminal-level
proof and not allowing double jeopardy.
Taxpayers and ratepayers pick up a significant proportion of the
costs. In Texas, till-linked ID scanners are mandated
for under 40s. Compliance of this buffer is actively tested.
It's criminal to serve minors and a regulatory offense to serve the under 40s.
In New Zealand, on average, license holders would only experience a compliance
test once every couple of decades, perhaps with a 14-year-old like in
Rodney. If they fail, no worries, just a regulatory
offense. However, the ID tech already exists in New Zealand, but
we'd rather leave the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff.Across Australia,
anyone serving alcohol, including private work functions, must undertake
third-party training. In Canada, licensees
have a safe departure obligation for intoxicated patrons,
and employers have similar responsibilities.
New South Wales has just brought this in under vibrancy laws.
The common theme is simple: better data, better testing, better training, clearer
responsibilities, policing the buffer, meaningful consequence, and risk
mitigation when standards aren't met. Which brings us to these amendments.
These amendments were made after our son and mates got served seven times while
very drunk. After a rural Waikato sting where 8 of 11
premises failed. After the blackout drunk German backpacker was ejected from a
bar and pack raped minutes later. After one punch
drunken deaths outside low-risk venues.
After J swap workplace drink driving investigation produced no
sector-wide education. Mamahouch rapist allowed to continue to
work on the bar on bail. They are being proposed by people who
know New Zealand's under 25 road death risks,
rural risks, and violence stats. These amendments will not
visibly reduce paperwork. They do not refocus regulation and enforcement.
They do not educate the workforce.
They do not create meaningful deterrence, nor do they require regulators to
use power they have. They do not help the industry learn from mistakes.
As for the proposed changes to appeal rights in the future, if this had
happened one district away, we would have no right
of objection to their licence. When regulation enforcement is so
light, this is the only option families have.
The proposed changes around barbers and hairdressers seem to ignore preloading
risks and complicate a simple principle that if you're charging for alcohol,
you should have a license, hence training.
Questions around density and LAPs are real and perhaps should be decided
democratically, but you cannot argue for local control and then
remove regulators' ability to influence their environment.
Last week, Ben and I watched the CCTV that
wasn't deleted of our son coming and going from these venues.
We watched the sort of stumbling walk that the judge, independent witnesses
recognized, that software could pick up in
seconds. We watched a 16-year-old being served, and then
again. That night, managers, servers, banks, and payment systems
missed what should have been obvious.
If more layers of protection had existed and been policed, there would have been
more chances to get it right. What is not lost on us is that if
Silas had been 18 and died drunk on the way home, like the
couple from Apoteke we read in The Herald this morning, the coroner,
regulators, industry, and media wouldn't even ask how someone so
objectively intoxicated had been repeatedly
served. Yet serving people who are under the influence or
intoxicated or minors has been against the law for a
century.
But he was 16,
and it is sickening
how visibly intoxicated a 16-year-old and two underage
friends can be repeatedly served alcohol with no ID across
three licensed premises in full view of many patrons
and staff.
If the boys' afternoon doesn't make you challenge the
status quo, our culture, our systems, and by
extension, these amendments,
then we don't know what will. Thank you.
Hey, well, thank you both to you and Ben and, and you,
Sarah, and particularly talking about your son, Silas.
It's obviously very distressing hearing that, and obviously you've
got to live with that. But that's been a very powerful
submission, and I want to thank you both for sharing that with the
committee and
taking us through that.
Thanks, Andrew. Thanks.
All right. Thank you very much.
Right, members,
we are going to have a break just for five minutes.
So we'll come back at 10:38, if that's all right.
We'll just go and put everything on hold for five minutes,
and then we'll have Pippa Coom come back on.
So thank
you.Okay.
Are we ready to resume?
Pippa, are you there?
Oh, kia ora, Chair.
Hello.
I've just been reinvited.
Yeah. Thank you for coming on board.
I'm glad you're an employed barrister rather than just being a barrister.
I'm employed barrister, yes, with Ralph.
Yeah, I see that in your thing.
Yes.
All right. Now, we've got five minutes with you.
Well, tena koe, Mr. Chair. Māori koutou. This is my personal submission.
It is informed by my experience of working with communities against
alcohol harm. I focus on reducing alcohol harm in
Auckland City Centre. I'm an employed barrister and a former
Auckland councillor. As lawmakers, I'm sure the first
question you ask when considering a bill is what are the problems you
are seeking to address? I would like to focus on three
so-called problems, particularly with regard to community
participation. The first is that this is all
about reducing red tape.
But actually, by restricting where objections come from, the
amendments will perversely introduce red tape and additional costs.
Requiring certification will further deter
public participation and impose considerable
administrative and cost burdens on the licensing
inspectorate, councils, and applicants.
The second perceived problem is that objections are coming from distant
lobbying groups rather than coming from the local
communities. It appears to be, in my experience, an industry
myth that the community participation reforms opened up a free-for-all
of vexatious objections. In fact,
less than 1% of applications are opposed.
And some stats from Auckland that you might be interested in.
Before the community participation reforms, the DLC
here granted 99.8% of
all license applications, and that has only dipped very, very
slightly in the last couple of years to
99.6% of applications being granted.
So there really isn't an issue there.
Engaging in a process is complex and challenging, and a lot of the
work that groups like Communities Against Alcohol Harm does is
pro bono and should be encouraged and
supported rather than shut
down.Reintroducing standing will
impact quality decision-making by restricting objectors who
have a genuine interest and knowledge of relevant issues risks in their
local area. You have heard that the one-kilometer restriction will have
all sorts of perverse outcomes and stop legitimate
objections from people who know their communities through a whole range of
connections, whether it's through whakapapa, through church,
school, where they work, et cetera.
Thirdly, we're being asked to believe that the reforms are needed to strike a
balance. If that were seriously the case, you
would be considering reforms that strengthen community
participation and further reduce alcohol harm.
The current regulatory framework is heavily weighted in favor of the
alcohol
industry, and that was really powerfully expressed by Ben and
Sarah Sims.
Another indicator is that in Auckland, there are now over
1,200 off-license premises,
and the city center is very heavily saturated.
If Parliament wishes to achieve the object of the act, minimizing
alcohol harm, and generally wants to strike a balance, you
have the opportunity to amend the act to facilitate the achievements of its purpose
to the benefit of the community as a whole.
And one good place to start is regulating rapid
alcohol delivery services, which are causing a whole lot
of new harm through impulse purchasing, binge
drinking, and youth drinking. Another good place to look would
be to limit off-license opening hours to
9:00 PM closing, which was first proposed.
And in Auckland that is working, and there is stats now showing that ED
admissions have dropped since the Auckland
LAP was introduced.
So in summary, it's very difficult to see what problems the
reforms are trying to address. The issues are very much more about
industry perception rather than based in reality, and this is
particularly the case when allowing the community to participate
in valuing local decision-making.
I ask you to consider only proceeding with reforms that are based
on evidence and take a health approach that
reduces harm. Ngā mihi.
Right. Thanks, Pippa. Right, we've got a question from Camilla
Belich.
Thanks so much for your
submission, Pippa. I just had a question around the types
of useful information that people from outside a
geographic area may provide. So I just wanted to know, do you
have any examples of
information that might be relevant for an application process
or a new license or a renewal that
would be
excluded or possibly excluded under these new proposals?
Well, I think that there will be a whole lot of perverse outcomes by these
restrictions because with, say, the case of Auckland is a very large
territorial authority, so you probably won't really notice that change.
But where people are living in smaller communities or on the periphery, so say
you might, as Grant mentioned with speaking with Communities Against
Alcohol Harm, if you're in a rural community, you could very
easily be over one kilometer from a territorial
boundary, but that would still be part of your community.
So it might be your community connection because that's where you go to church
or your marae or your kōhanga reo. All of those
connections that people have, and by saying that they have to be within one
kilometer of that boundary is a very artificial
measure. And people know where they're interested.
They know where they have those connections.
And so the current
reform or the current legislation
and regulatory,
sorry, framework is working, and that's what I really would like to emphasize
to the committee. There really isn't a problem here that needs
solving.
Right. Hey, thanks, Pippa. I really appreciate you
helping us this morning. That's really nice.
Kia ora.
Right. We're going to Georgie Robertson from Hospitality
Licensing.
Hopefully, you are available.
Georgie, are you there?
Yep. I am. I'm just trying to-
How are you?
-start my video. I'm well, thank you. How are you?
Right. We've got 10 minutes with you-
There we go
... so looking forward to hearing from you.
Okay. I'm Georgie Robertson, and I'm of Hospitality
Licensing. Firstly, I'd like to thank the committee for the opportunity to
speak to my submission.
My company specializes in applying for licenses on
behalf of business owners, and that ranges from restaurants to taverns
to bottle stores and clubs. We represent over
900 licensed venues across the country, and I believe that's about
8% of the total licenses that have been issued in New
Zealand. We have a massive interest in this bill,
and we support it.
I'd like to speak to just a couple of the points that I've raised in my submission,
the first of which are pretty brief.
In terms of the changes requiring
low alcohol beverages, I applaud it. Yes, please.
We fully support it because clubs and on-licenses
already sell zero beers as opposed to, well,
including as well as low
alcohol. The zero options are a huge seller by
comparison to the low. The low-alcohol options generally just
sit on the shelf in the fridge gathering dust and at
some point get thrown out because they're past their best before date.
They're only stocked because it's the requirements of the legislation,
not because that's actually what patrons want to drink.
In terms of special licenses,
there needs to be a distinguishing feature for conditions
between existing licensees that apply for a special
licenseTo that of an individual for a one-off
event from Joe Bloggs, and then to different again to
events, large event places. Discretionary
conditions, if they're outlined in the regulation, should also
differentiate between high and low-risk
events. We haven't seen the proposed regulation, so
can't really comment on it. But what I can say is I've seen some
really silly conditions imposed on
special licenses that have been put there to reduce
alcohol-related harm.
An 80th birthday where only one alcoholic
beverage could be purchased at a time.
So I can buy one for my husband and I can buy a glass of wine for Nana, but I can't
buy a glass for me.
It's not really a high-risk event, and the condition was entirely
inappropriate, but it was still there.
Restaurants holding off licenses, that's
really good. It's a really good idea, and I don't believe it
needs to be restricted to those with a retail area.
And I say that because in my mind it's promoting the object
of the act. If I go out for dinner, we buy a bottle of wine, but we
don't finish it, so we take it home, and there's no point of that.
Otherwise, we stay in the restaurant and drink the whole bottle of wine, and we
might not want to do that. That to me is logical, and I think it's a
good thing to do.
Now comes the big one for me, which is the restrictions on objections.
I really support the amendments as set out in the bill.
Listening to Pippa talk about rural, I think she's right that
a rural community probably needs to have a wider
boundary. But I believe
that objectors actually need to qualify to the DLC that they
are a resident or in some way will be
genuinely affected by the grant of a license or the renewal of a
license. In our lived experience over the
past few years, the community participation amendment has seen
a massive increase in objections, most often from
particular groups who appear to be weaponizing the objection
process as part of their own
anti-alcohol stand, rather than the merits of an
application or of a licensee. The groups appear
to have developed a cottage industry from objecting to licenses,
and a lot of the time it's the same objectors time after
time after time, regardless of where they live
or if they're personally affected by the license.
I have seen objections from people that live
significant distances and in totally different
territorial authorities from where the application relates.
It does happen, not to the extreme of Invercargill and
Taupo as Mr. Hewison was mentioned earlier, but it
does happen.
A number of these objections could also be determined as vexatious,
but DLCs are really reluctant to classify them as this.
I suggest that genuine objections are really
important to consider. It's my preference for the amendment
to introduce thresholds to be met for objectors to
ensure that they are genuine, that they have read applications,
and that they have evidence supporting their concerns.
This would significantly reduce the expense, which is, to be
honest, it's between $10,000 and $15,000 for a licensee
to incur to get their legal counsel to protect their
livelihood, and often they've done nothing wrong.
And that doesn't even take into account council's own cost.
Then there's the emotional toll that it takes on licensees, and that's
immeasurable.
It would be fairer still, in my mind, particularly in Auckland,
to tighten up the amendment to just those who can certify that they
live or work within a kilometer of the premises to which the
application relates.
One instance I had where an objector lived just at
the cusp of two kilometers from a venue, and he was affected
by the exterior color, so the visual amenity of the
store when he traveled past it every now and again on a bus,
and that was a valid objection, and that's kind of not fair.
What I don't like with the current legislation is that one or a
couple of objectors, especially our repeated ones, should be able to
effectively hold a business to ransom by way of
the alcohol licensing process, and I don't think that's fair.
I would also support an amendment to allow a licensing committee to
strike out objections and waive the requirement for a hearing to be
held at their discretion.
Then finally, the right to respond.
We've got a few questions. Yeah.
Am I time?
We've got a few questions, so-
Go for it
... if you can take them.
Right. Let's go to Todd first.
Oh, thanks. And maybe, George, you're about to come onto this, but I want to...
Yeah, the right to respond.
Yeah.
Why do you think that is useful, and do you think that will help maybe get
rid of some of the vexatious complaints that you were talking about?
No. Well, the
right to respond normally happens at the hearing itself, so it's not going to make
it any cheaper. The cost is still going to be there.
But what it does do, it makes an objector actually have to provide
something. It has to show their evidence of something.
They can't just say, "I believe this to happen." They
actually need to put their money where their mouth is and say, "I've seen this
happen. Here's the photos, here's the videos.
This is what's happened. It's terrible." And then everyone's going to listen.
But at the moment, it's only up to the DLC to do that, and some
will and some won't.
Just related to that, the issue around privacy of addresses, which is an
issue that was raised this morning, I think-
Yep
... by Dr. HewisonIs that, what's your response
to that? Is,
and under these new rules, will private addresses
have to be required to prove that you live within the territorial
area?
It doesn't have to be provided to any person other than the
DLC.
And the DLC-
So does the bill... Have you seen anything in the bill that would make sure that,
confidentiality arrangements around that, or would you be
open to
supporting that that information is kept private, like such as-
Absolutely. Of course. I don't need their phone number.
I don't need to know that they live at 17 Jones
Close.
If provided that the DLC has that information and then
can say, "Yep, it's within a kilometer," I'm happy with what the DLC has
to say. Totally.
Right.
And it should remain private. We don't need to know.
Kahurangi Carter, one for you.
Oh, kia ora. Thanks. So for the submission,
Georgie, are you aware that in
statistics that Te Whatu Ora brought out in 2018 to
2023, of the
9,490 off-license, on-license, and
club licenses that were
granted, only 23 of those licenses were
refused and only 110 went to hearings, and that's just in
the Tamaki region?
Because what you said was
time after time after time, which is three times
that there is submitters that is the same.
So those seem to be quite low statistics in terms of
what you're talking about.
No question. Yep.
There's actually quite a lot of hearings that are happening.
Let's look at Auckland at the moment.
There are a lot more hearings that are going on.
But let's talk before that. Before it even makes it to a hearing,
you get objections. You try and work with the objectors.
The objectors don't want to talk to the licensees.
Then they say they'll only talk via the licensing inspector, so
it gets to be a protracted situation.
You're then held over a barrel, essentially, by them.
If you accept these extra six conditions that may
or may not already be in the legislation, let's say about
how you advertise products or the promotions that you do, we
will consider withdrawing our objection.
And so the objections are made to a
significant number of applications within Auckland at the
moment.
Only a portion of those go through to a hearing, but it's the luck
of the draw whether or not it goes to a hearing or not, or whether or not they'll
speak with you, or whether or not they'll accept some form of
negotiation. And I don't think that an
objector
in its current format, someone who lives in
Henderson objecting to something in,
let's say, Māngere, has any...
I don't think that they have standing or an ability
to say, "You need this condition on your license in order to sell alcohol
here." So it's-
Well, just to put that question a bit more succinctly,
you obviously, you said 900 clients, I think.
Yeah.
What sort of percentage would you be doing the pre
negotiation of those applications that you handle
every year,
before you get to that statistic that was just
quoted by Kahurangi?
I would say that probably
75% of the off-license applications
renewals that I do are objected to.
75%?
Yeah, a heap. And of those that go to a
hearing would probably be 35 to 40%.
Right. Okay.
Can I just-
Yeah.
Would you be able to send us those
statistics?
Oh look, I'll go through-
Because it's very different from what Te Whatu Ora has
provided with the...
So it would be good to see the difference.
And I just wanted to say
as well, do you think that if somebody
in Henderson, whose child went to school at a
liquor store in Māngere would have a
reason to actually object?
Well, if the liquor store was close to the school,
totally. Yeah, I get that.
Yeah.
Because they're doing something in the area.
They're being affected by the license.
That's-
So even though they lived in Henderson?
Even if they lived in Henderson.
Right.
But they're still doing something in Māngere, that's a
very real thing.
Okay. Last-
Rather than something that's imagined, like going past on a bus.
I mean, that's just silly.
Right. Last question, because you mentioned, and this thing about
restaurants, no one's covered this, although it was in one earlier submission,
but we didn't get to it.
You said that's a good thing. Why is
allowing restaurants to have off licenses a good thing?
Because for that exact reason that I gave the example, that you go into a
restaurant, you buy a bottle of wine, and you don't finish it.
We don't-
So at the moment you can't walk out with-
You can't walk out with a bottle. Absolutely.
But everyone assumes, the submissions I've seen, they assume that that means you're
going to set up, the restaurant's going to set up a shop.
That's not what you understand this part of
the bill means. It means that if you happen to have a meal, you
can take the bottle with you.
That's what I'd like the bill to say.
At the moment, the bill says if the restaurant is a restaurant and then
it's got a little retail area to the side that sells parma
ham and our beautiful salts and olive oil,
then we could sell wine as well. What I'd like to see is that it just applies
to restaurants, full stop. They're not going to turn into pseudo bottle
stores. They don't have the
ability to do that with what they and how they operate.
But-I don't see that a restaurant to have an off license needs to have
a separate retail area. I don't. They're going to sell-
Okay
... the wine at a more expensive price anyway-
... than you'd get anywhere.
All right. Thank you, George. You were well over, but, good to hear.
Okay, I'm sorry.
No, no, it's not your fault. Okay, thank you very much.
Yeah.
And now we're going to Scott Evans.
He's in an institute of license- liquor licensing inspectors.
Are you
there?
Can you hear me?
Yeah. We can, Scott. Let's rip into it. No doubt we've got questions for you.
We've all read submissions, so people sort of going through stuff that
we've all read.
Thank you very much. I will keep it very short and brief because I think questions
are the most important part of this.
So I'm presenting this as submission on behalf of NZILI, and we
represent over 200 members of licensing inspectors across New Zealand.
I think our
submission is quite self-explanatory
on the first two pages where we sit.
A particular emphasis on the amendment relating
to special licenses, which we've opposed.
But also I can really sort of provide that sort of
technical sort of expertise behind a lot of these changes, very
much to strengthen the bill. And I'll also point out as well,
NZILI has made a number of recommendations around that to
strengthen that bill.
I am open to any questions you have.
Can you just answer that question I was asking about restaurants?
Yeah, sure. So,
first and foremost, before this came in,
we had the Law Commission report, and one of the aspects of that Law
Commission report was to
limit the proliferation of off licenses.
So that's why we've got such a tight criteria in the act
to limit off licenses. For this particular
proposal to allow all restaurants to hold an
off license,
there is risk where you would have essentially thousands
of premises that would immediately become eligible for an off
license anywhere in
the city center, anywhere in Mangere,
anywhere, they would immediately become eligible.
And even though restrictions could be placed on what they could sell, you'd
still have the ability of customers that are able to be
in that restaurant and then leave.
Then we've got the issue of where a lot of our
licensees for restaurants,
you would consider a very sort of low bar to be suitable to hold that
license. So there wouldn't be too much sort of knowledge
in sort of
managing the off-premise sale of alcohol.
So there's also that risk where you'd have potentially
inexperienced licensees conducting
that sale.
So if Georgie talked about someone with
orders of bottle of wine, doesn't drink at all, could walk out the door.
The off license thing in this bill doesn't actually
really cover that, does it?
No, essentially
in this bill, it's allowing these sort of restaurants that also
have a shop.
I think there was a case in
Lower Hutt where this was relevant.
Don't quote me on that.
But they have sort of a shop where they sell their own specialist wine
alongside their other products. That was the point of the bill.
And I think when you go back one more step, there was a private
member's bill in, that was pulled out the ballot, that
had a much more sort of narrow definition and really sort of
focused on, I think, where this amendment
has come from.
Okay. Right. Members, other questions?
Does the issue around the clubs, the earlier submission we had,
and the difficulty of
clubs trying to get licenses for special events and,
in some cases, the view was that there were sort of onerous
restrictions put on it. What would be your comment on that?
So,
I think the intent of this bill is
on the right track where essentially it's making it easier for clubs to
apply for an on license to allow them to do
those events, those private functions, and they would not
need those special licenses. So straight away, that would save them
a significant cost, and then time because they wouldn't have to
reapply for their special licenses.
However, I think we've seen some of the submissions where they want
to make sure that they still retain the club
aspect of their license. So it's basically
for members, guests, authorized customers, and for functions and
club events.
So there's a number of ways the committee could look at this.
There could be a situation where they set up a completely different separate
type of license, like a club on license, which has those particular
rules where they can sell and supply to members,
guests, plus those extra club events,
functions. Or another option, which the committee could
explore, is amending Section 60 of the act, which
is to do with authorized customers, and that could allow
authorized customers also to be
for private functions and for club events.
Now, I'd say two things on that. The committee would need
to define what a club event is and define what a
function is in that section, and we already do that with authorized customers, so
that's no problem. But also, I would say it also
would have to come to particular... rules.
For example, we did with the RNZ RSA
allowing non-members being served.
They have to have a manager on duty on those days.
So something you could tie that to is whenever a function's taking
place, you need a manager on duty.
Clubs also pay three different classes of
licenses. So you've got a class one club license, which is
your large cozy clubs, for example, and class three is your small
little club
on the seaside, bowling club, for example.
You could use that and say, if you want to be doing
functions and club events, you're a class one club.
So those clubs would have to then pay that extra amount to allow them
to do those functions and club events.
So that's a way around it. And I think this is really important because
you've got the likes of small golf clubs, you've got the likes of bowling
clubs, which have people just turn up to play social
bowls. Legally speaking, if they're not a member or with a member,
they can't be served. And I think
society has moved on from how those clubs used to be
20 or so years ago, where there's much more of a sort of
social aspect of people turning up and playing social
bowls or social golf and things like that.
So I think this bill really should capture that
intent.
Right. Anyone else got any more questions? That's been very helpful.
Just a final thing. In terms of clubs,
what's your experience in terms of non-compliance, in terms
of not meeting the rules?
I wouldn't hold it any higher than
on licenses or off licenses, and
that does come with a proviso.
With licensing inspectors, a lot of our inspectors take
a risk-based approach, so we are checking the likes of the
high-risk
bottle stores in higher deprivation areas much more
than we would be checking the local bowling club
that has 15 members. So we need it to come with that proviso.
But
from an Auckland point of view, I cannot recall the last time we've, say,
issued an infringement notice to a club.
I am aware that there has been a few enforcement action taken against
clubs around New Zealand, but those particular
situations warranted it anyway, and we see those situations
also occur commonly. Not commonly, but also occur on on
licenses or off licenses. So I wouldn't say there's
any heightened compliance issues at all.
Okay. Camilla, you had a question?
Yeah. Sorry, we had covered this a tiny bit, but I just wanted to be
clear. In relation to licenses that are either new
licenses or licenses that are being renewed, if the person
has issues in terms of previous
actions that might be relevant to them obtaining a license or good character
assessment,
what are the kind of things that would come up without the ability for
the community to object? We've heard that the police have some involvement, but
from your perspective, what are the other things that might be
covered? We're just sort of worried about losing pertinent information if it was
geographically excluded.
So where objectors come in when it
comes to
applications is sometimes they will disclose something that
we do not know about how they are operating the premises at
the time.
As inspectors, we can't be everywhere at once, so we
rely on information from the community, other sources.
So there's been cases where they've brought that to our attention,
and then other times they have found things
that we do not know about,
and this could be something to do with
the person's character. I would say when it comes to
objections,
objectors would probably bring less information about, say, a
suitability of the applicant. But when it comes to how a premises is
operating in the area,
all the cases where licenses have been declined and
objectors have been part of it, they've brought in sort of information
that shows this is how it's operating in the area.
This is the bad things that are essentially happening.
Right. Very good. Hey, we're well over time, but that's been very helpful.
Thank you for that, Scott.
Thank you very much.
All right. We're going to Hospitality New Zealand.
Hospitality New Zealand, are you there? Sam?
Christie?
I think you might be out of order.
Oh, am I? Oh, sorry. I'm going to-
The next option
... sorry, I'm going to Steve Randerson from Health Coalition
Aotearoa. Okay. All yours, Steve.
We have
read the report, so I'm just going to keep reiterating that.
So questions are far more powerful.
Thank you, Andrew. Thank you, Minister.
Tena koutou katoa to the committee, and good morning.
Yes, as you heard, I'm representing the Alcohol Expert Panel of
Health Coalition Aotearoa. So our membership has broad
experience in alcohol policy research, health promotion, and
community action to support New Zealand to flourish and to reduce
alcohol harm.
I'm not going to go in great detail in all parts of our submission, but just to
point out that over the last 15 years, we've seen
the evidence, all the major government inquiries and
public opinion on how to address alcohol harm consistently
point to two things very relevant to this bill, and that is stronger
regulation of the availability of alcohol,
and second, a stronger voice for communities.So
you'll see we are deeply disappointed that this bill, largely for the first time,
heads in the opposite direction,
and we're opposed to most of those proposals.
They might seem minor, but cumulatively, they do open that
door to greater availability, and that will result in more harm
than we would otherwise see across the country.
So just to raise a few issues about the weakness of our current policy
on availability,
it would be important for the committee to note that our national law currently
leaves only two hours in the day where you can't obtain alcohol.
That's even the case here in Auckland under our LAP.
There's no national limit on the density of outlets, and we have
very high levels of cheap off-license supply, particularly and
more so in lower income areas and communities with a greater
Maori population,
and we know the additional harm that that causes is
disproportionately experienced by Maori.
I was actually just last week reviewing three South Auckland suburbs and
counted 32 current off-licensors across the area.
So in our mahi and our research, we see really high levels of concern about the
way this promotes alcohol availability to children, how it
provides access and normalizes drinking to the next generation.
And it's for those reasons that we're opposed to these kind of
provisions, like allowing a whole new wave of
off-licenses to emerge from restaurants.
I think the criterion there are far too broad.
Handpicking certain businesses like hairdressers to have special rights to
supply.
I think communities that are already saturated with supply don't want more cracks
like this opening up in the regulatory framework.
And around LAPs,
changing those to prevent them from addressing existing outlets
is unwarranted and will perpetuate harm in communities.
It locks them into current harmful levels of supply by taking away the
only tool that they have to work with their councils on
addressing harm in specific places that are oversupplied.
And we note that those LAPs are produced through strong public
consultation,
and measures can be reasonably and appropriately targeted.
Rapid delivery is also another emerging issue.
A study just out of Australia has found people
buying alcohol through rapid delivery,
40% of them had received a delivery while intoxicated.
So we recommend really delaying deliveries to the next day, and ensuring
compliance checks are very well-resourced.
On licensing, it's been clearly said this morning how the bad old
days will be back of wasted time on litigation if you
reintroduce standing. That discourages and excludes the
few genuine objectors who might show up.
It means committees lose valuable information.
And I'd just add that specifically that criterion of residing or having an office
or place of business in the DLC area is actually incredibly
limiting. There are a range of people in cultural leadership
roles, health roles, community support work, that have very
valuable information about the risks of alcohol, and they may not have a
set place of business or location of work.
I think that really needs to be looked at.
Ideally, the provision would simply be dropped.
So to conclude, we're calling for the government to prioritize far more
effective policy to prevent and reduce the enormous costs of alcohol,
including a more health-focused reform of the act to set better standards on
supply, remove alcohol marketing,
and give effect to Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
Right. Thank you, Steve. Right. Members, any questions for Mr.
Anderson?
Right. Camilla Village. She's in fine form this morning.
Thanks for your submission, Steve. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
I have been asking a few questions around applicants for
renewals and initial licenses, and I just
wanted to find out from you about some of the information that
may be useful that comes from outside the geographic area,
but because that would obviously be impacted by the changes that are
proposed in this bill.
Well, as I mentioned, there'll be a range of people in different roles, community
workers, health workers that have regional roles,
that will be well aware of hotspots in a particular community.
In our work, we've seen cultural leaders like the kaumatua from a
marae be challenged on his right to object, despite having
very close connection to that whole area.
I don't think he would probably gain the right to
object under these provisions.
And what we found in our case study of about eight areas was,
like the previous submitter from NZ LE mentioned,
community members live in the area. They know the harm.
In all eight cases, there were hotspots in the local area that community members
raised in objections, and none of those hotspots were mentioned
by the officials from the police or health or
licensing.
So important information will get lost.
Okay. All right. Hey, thanks, Steve, for joining us
this morning. It's been very helpful. All right?
Thank you.
Right. Now,
Christie and Sam, who I've tried to introduce before,
hopefully you're available now.
Hospitality New Zealand, if you're there, we're ready and waiting.
Kia ora. Good morning. I'm-
How are you, Sam?
Good, thank you. I can't turn my video on for some reason, but just-
Doesn't matter. We can hear you at least
And just waiting on our chief executive, Christy Phillips, to join.
Do you want to rip into it anyway?
Can do. Yep.
Look, thank you to the chair and to the committee for the opportunity to
speak on this bill this morning.
We are supportive of the Improving Alcohol
Regulation Amendment Bill, as I'm sure you would expect.
We are the representative voice of the hospitality sector, and
we represent 2,500 businesses across New Zealand,
including cafes, restaurants, bars, nightclubs, through to accommodation
offerings.
We've been
an organization for over 120 years.
Look, we view this bill as taking some steps
towards correcting the licensing process, as well as
supporting some relatively small but meaningful tweaks to the legislation to
enable smoother operations for hospitality businesses.
We'd like the bill to go a bit further in some areas, but particularly related to
improving the licensing process from our perspective.
But this bill is a positive step forward for improving certainty
for license holders.
I just want to cover off the sort of key points that we would like to be
emphasizing. Look, firstly, the proposed licensing changes
are significant for our operators.
The most recent changes to the licensing process have increased the volume and
vexatiousness of objections, which I'm sure you've heard a lot about,
and often from those who aren't based in the community that the applicant is based
in. So our view is restricting where an objector can be located,
rebalancing right of reply provisions, and ensuring that new rules don't
impact existing license holders should reduce some delays and
costs to both the LCs and applicants, as well as improving certainty for
business owners.
We'd also note that some members of the committee may see this bill as
liberalizing access to alcohol. Our view is this is
rebalancing the licensing process and ensuring that it's a workable
process for all parties.
Rates of drinking in New Zealand are dropping despite more licenses being issued.
So prior to the implementation of the Sale of Liquor Act in
1989, there were about 3,000 licenses.
Today, there are about 12,000. Conversely, liquor
consumption has decreased more than 30% since 1986.
So
increased consumption, i.e.
increased access, sorry, i.e. more licenses and more places to purchase alcohol,
has not actually translated into higher consumption.
It must also be remembered that these applicants are members of
their community, and they take their responsibilities and obligations as license
holders very seriously. And because the liquor
license is the key asset that the business retains,
without it an ability to trade as a bar is minimal.
They take that responsibility very
seriously. We're also very supportive of the no alcohol
provisions. These
just make the operation of a business run much smoother.
We're currently purchasing low alcohol to satisfy that condition of
the act, but the consumer trends have definitely moved in the direction of no
alcohol.
And so we see that as tidying a gray area that might seem a little bit,
might seem insignificant to some, but is actually quite important for a lot of our
operators. And then the other key point that I just wanted to touch on was around
extending the trading hours
during televised significant events.
So every Rugby World Cup we've been part of the process to support a bill's
passage,
and in our view, this process also creates further opportunities for other
global events such as the FIFA World Cup that's on at the moment.
So,
thanks for the opportunity to comment on the bill.
All right. Fantastic. Hey, thanks, Sam. Now, first question, Todd Stevenson.
Oh, hi, Sam. Thanks for submitting.
Look, we've seen actually this week Stats New Zealand put out data showing that
actually alcohol consumption is down again.
I suppose what I wanted to ask is, and this is tying into the low alcohol
and zero alcohol options, is that a trend you're seeing?
More people are actually making more conscious decisions to
actually either reduce the,
have low alcohol products or in fact zero alcohol products?
Is that what your members are seeing?
What are you, yeah, what can you comment on that?
Yeah.
Absolutely. I think there has been a general trend towards
obviously the low and no alcohol options, zero alcohol
options in particular. But also across the
board, consumption patterns are changing.
So more of that focus on the experience of
whether that's cocktail bars or that sort of
experiential opportunity. And so more focused on
the,
not so much on the volume of alcohol per occasion, but more
around how that's consuming. So I think overall, those consumption
patterns are changing significantly, and that's coming through in the statistics.
Okay.
May I also just add in there as well in terms of the
way people are consuming is with the
zero alcohol options coming through all ranges of alcohol,
it's actually allowing our mixologists then to actually hone it into a really
specialized craft.
So we're actually seeing a lot of business
owners making that as part of their actually business as usual, rather than
just looking at the alcoholic cocktail side of things.
All right. Hey, can I ask you a question around the restaurants?
Why do you believe
we should make it easier for restaurants to have an off license?
From our perspective, I
guess,
theThe bill probably needs some further clarification
around to what extent that would apply.
I think from our view,
what is the consideration of what constitutes retail, given that
there's many restaurants and cafes that there's
different extents to what
products they might have for sale already and what does that look like in
terms of alcohol. So I think there probably does need to be a little bit more of a
consideration in that area. But currently, if you go
to some of those Mediterranean type delis where they've got the
boutique food offerings alongside the restaurant offering,
from an operational point of view, they have to hold two different
licenses for different kitchens.
But the bill's going to allow that. If they're a vineyard, they can sell alcohol.
They can sell their own alcohol under the bill.
So
that sort of negates it. But anyway, hey, thanks Sam
and Christy for coming on board and having
a chat to us this morning.
Thanks very much.
All right. Now we've got Sarah from Lion, who I
thought was going to turn up in person, but I think you're Zooming in.
Is that right, Sarah?
I'm here in Wellington.
No, Sarah's here in Wellington.
Oh, you are here. Oh, I saw something saying you're going to be promoted.
Maybe that was for some other reason. Hey, good morning.
Nice that you've taken the time to fly down. Right.
We've got 10 minutes with you, Sarah.
Good morning, and thank you for giving us this opportunity.
My name is Sarah Tucker. I'm the Corporate Affairs Director for Lion New Zealand.
Lion is one of New Zealand's largest producers and suppliers of beer, wine, and
spirits. We've been brewing beer for over 150 years, and we currently
have four breweries in New Zealand.
Our largest, The Pride, in Auckland.
We're also proud to operate Panhead Brewery in Upper Hutt and Emerson's
Breweries and Speight's Brewery in Dunedin.
We also own Wither Hills Winery in Marlborough and Havana Coffee,
with roasteries in Auckland and Wellington.
We've got a limited number of licenses ourselves.
We have taprooms or restaurants at Emerson's, Panhead, Wither
Hills, and our Little Creatures venue in Hobsonville Point,
and a tasting room at Speight's as part of the Heritage Center
brewery tour. Beyond that, we don't sell directly to the public.
We only sell to those with a license.
But the long-term sustainability of our business depends very much on the safe and
responsible retailing of the beer, wine, and spirits that we produce, and a
well-functioning licensing framework is very important to us.
We support the bill. It continues to uphold the fundamental object and
purpose of the act. It ensures a role for members of the public as well as the
agencies, but proposes targeted amendments which will help to improve some
of the Act's inefficiencies that don't serve its purpose.
As a major producer of beer, wine, and spirits, we're very aware that excessive
consumption or misuse of our products can lead to harm.
We believe that it's appropriate therefore, that the production and the sale of
alcohol should be a privilege and not a right,
and that it continues to be a highly regulated product.
I wanted to talk just a little bit now about the market conditions currently.
The beer, wine, and spirits industry has been in long-term decline in New Zealand,
and globally for decades, with consumers, especially the younger
generations, increasingly choosing moderation or abstinence.
You'll be aware of the just-released alcohol available for consumption data.
Someone just mentioned it actually with the previous submitters, which shows that
in New Zealand in the year to March, per capita consumption has fallen to the
lowest level ever recorded. A 16% decline from
2020 and a 36%
per capita decrease since the mid 1980s.
We operate in this market and our data is consistent.
It shows a 13% decline in overall volume from 2020 to
2026, and our evidence suggests that this will continue, and we are
projecting the decline will be 18% from 2020 by
2029. Nielsen scan data shows a fall in the volume of
beer of 4.5% over the past year.
You'll not be surprised therefore to hear that the area of growth for us in recent
years has been in lighter options, and especially in non-alcoholic or
0% products. This is not just in beer.
We've been creating lighter wines at Wither Hills for many years.
While with Lindauer, we've created an incredibly popular 0%
option. We also produce a lower alcohol version of our most popular
spirit-based mixed drink, Hi-Ketsu.
Globally, sales of no alcohol adult alternatives are projected to
increase from 10 billion to 15 billion by 2029.
You'll also have seen the health survey data on the decline in New Zealand of
hazardous and binge drinking, 22% since 2020.
We are well below the OECD average.
This mega trend is shaping the global alcohol market, and the trend's
also reflected in the World Health Organization data that shows since
2010, alcohol attributable mortality globally has fallen by over
20%.
Notwithstanding these facts, harm remains a risk, and it's something we need a
whole of society approach to. And by that I mean the regulators, our community,
and business working together to ensure that moderation trends continue and
that harm continues to reduce.
Moving on to a summary of our views on the bill.
Over recent years, and particularly over the past couple of years,
our teams all over the country have heard an increasing volume of stories from our
customers, from the largest to the smallest.
These are responsible, legitimate operators about their challenges with the current
licensing system. They tell us about the inherent
unpredictability and unfairness of licensing processes, the
variability in the administration of the Act around the country,
conditions that get imposed without any evidence, or because someone has said to
the licensee, "If you don't accept this condition, we'll take you to a hearing."
The cost and time in getting even a straight renewal approved for a license for a
responsible operator with a proven track record.
We were present earlier this year at the Hospitality Summit here at Parliament,
where we heard that the highest priority policy area for the sector is
licensingAs someone who's worked closely to the licensing
system in a previous life, I'm genuinely astonished by what I
hear about what is going on these days, in particular with regard to
license conditions and the manner in which they're being imposed.
Good licensees are being pressured by some agencies and lobby groups, and this
should be a concern to the committee. It's not good regulation.
I know you've heard from many groups, and I've been listening this morning, that
the bill will remove community participation rights.
As a first principle, Lion agrees that the community in which we operate must have
a voice, and I would note, as Christy and Sam just
mentioned, our customers who are operators are part of the
community. Communities always have the ability to participate,
and it will continue to do so with these changes.
But there needs to be a balance with the practical evidence-based framework
for business to operate within. At the moment, our observation is we don't have
that balance, and that's why we support the bill.
And lastly, I would refer the committee to a fundamental feature of the act that
the system of control over the sale and supply of alcohol in New Zealand must be
reasonable. The bill's proposed amendments will, in our view, ensure some of that
reasonableness returns. Thank you.
Right. Good. Thank you, Sarah. Right, who's got a question
for Lion?
No.
Yeah, I do. Sorry.
Oh, yeah. Here we go.
Oh, thank you. Thanks for your submission.
Yeah, just want to pick up, and again,
just diving a bit more into the trends you're
seeing. You mentioned specifically actually young people-
Yeah
... are either going for low-alcohol or no-alcohol options.
Can you just talk a bit more about what, yeah, you're seeing in your kind of market
research and et cetera? Because, yeah, that's obviously a group of concern to
us if they become problem
consumers of alcohol, but.
Yes, of course. And that is not to say that there are not issues with young
people drinking, as there always have been.
But we can see a marked difference with Gen Z.
And there's a number of ways in which they're moderating.
For example,
some will do what they call zebra striping, which is when they go out, they'll have
an alcoholic drink followed by a non-alcoholic drink to moderate.
They've got much more focus on health and wellbeing.
If you look at social media, and the sorts of trends that you see on social
media that young people are following, they're very focused on
health and wellbeing. So that's part of it.
They're interested in premiumization,
so whereas when we were younger, we might have had a gin and tonic, they now want a
curated tonic and a premium gin. They
really like cocktails, including non-alcoholic cocktails.
So it's a significant trend that's been ongoing for a long time.
It's not just in the younger generations.
We're seeing all generations moderating, but there's definitely a behavioral
change coming through with young people.
Chair, question
from me on the non-alcoholic
versions, which you've spoken a little bit about.
There's been some feedback, not this morning, but when we had some
hearings the other week, around not wanting to put the zero
options next to the alcoholic options in the supermarket.
Mm.
Couldn't quite understand why people would object to that.
Interested in your perspective on that.
Yeah. I can't think of a reason why you would object to that.
Having those options visible for people
to consider and to remind them that there are viable options, I think is really
important. If someone is thinking, "Well,
what do I want for this party?" To remind
them that there are great options to have so that people don't have to
drink alcohol is good. We had an issue a few years back
when we produced the Lindauer 0%, where we couldn't put it in
the alcohol area in the supermarket, which we would've liked to have
done because we see it as a valid option to drinking
a full-strength Lindauer. We had to put it elsewhere in the
supermarket. It was still really popular, and it sells out every Christmas,
but it would be far more sensible to have it as
an option so that people are reminded, and that it's easy for them.
Why would we not make it easier for people to purchase a zero-alcohol
option?
Right. Last question from Camilla.
Thank you. Thanks very much for your submission, and the
written submission as well. Just to kind of follow up on that.
Surely, I guess, a concern might be around the
zero-alcohol options being placed beside the alcoholic drinks, is that
currently when people go into supermarkets
wanting
a zero-alcohol option, they're not then also have to go to the
same area as the alcoholic options.
And surely for some people who may, I don't know, may
be overcoming alcohol issues, there might be an
issue there. So I think you can kind of see it either way
in terms of those particular products.
Yeah, and I think that's a valid point.
Currently, I think in most supermarkets you have the zero options
right next to the alcohol options.
That seems to be the way that it is at the moment, and perhaps that's the right
place for them. But-
Yeah
... yeah, having them certainly visible and available
is important, I think.
All right. Hey, thanks, Sarah. When you do drinks, zebra
drinks? That you do one and... What's the term that you use?
Zebra striping. You have-
Zebra striping. All right.
We've always recommended that people have a water.
Yeah, I know. Yeah. We do.
That's better.
But I like the idea of the zebra striping. All right. Cool.
Hey, thank you very much.
Right, now we're going Community Law Canterbury.
We've got Karen and Adele,
hopefully.Karen
or Adele, are you there?
Yeah, can you hear me?
Yeah, cool. Let's rip into it. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Okay, wonderful. Sorry, I don't know what's going on with my camera.
That's okay, Adele. I'll get started and-
Yeah, cool
... figure it out. Tēnā koe, Mr Chair, and tēnā ratou, members of the committee.
Thank you for this opportunity. I'm Karen Hodgson, Law Reform
Coordinator for Community Law Centers Aotearoa, which advocates for the Community
Law Centers across the country. Until recently, we held the contract
for an alcohol harm reduction project in which six community law
centers
did some particular work to assist communities to object to licenses.
And we are no longer doing that project because of funding restrictions,
but we still provide legal support to community groups
in this process. Canterbury Community Law was involved in that
project and still works in this space, and I'm grateful to have Adele here with me
online, and the experience that she brings.
She'll
speak a little bit later. Our submission set out our response, and
I'll summarize them here, that we don't support aspects of the bill
that increase availability and
alter the objection
process for communities. We think the bill leans too
far in favor of alcohol as a strategy for economic growth at the expense of
costs to the community, the criminal justice system, health system.
It's very clear that alcohol causes significant harm to our communities and harm
that is disproportionately experienced by Maori.
I just want to respond, there's been a lot of talk about the
numbers of
people consuming alcohol having reduced. Just a couple of things on that.
As far as I can tell, those figures are quite
broad. We haven't really looked at how are those figures,
how are they
spread across our communities. Are we seeing that it's dropping everywhere,
that consumption's dropping everywhere?
Or is it dropping in particular groups?
So I think just saying consumption's dropping, so we
can increase availability, it's fine,
which is being a bit simplistic. But I think that's
not
the only thing we need to think about.
And isn't it great that people are choosing to drink less, and
maybe we should be responding in line with that.
Maybe we should be saying, "People are drinking less.
Maybe we don't need to make it more available
for our communities." And why should we be increasing it
more if people really are drinking less?
So research shows that restricting alcohol availability is an effective
method to reduce harm, and the bill's impact is to increase its
availability and normalization, and ultimately, we expect
alcohol-related harm, including violence.
And we just urge the Select Committee to view these changes as a whole
and take into account these harms when we're thinking about increasing availability
in these ways. Just want to emphasize our concern about restrictions
on community participation. There's no evidence that objectors are
overwhelming the system and that there are vexatious
objections being raised. Quite the opposite.
There's not a lot of this happening.
We put some figures in our-- It's quite hard to see what's happening, but we
understand
that it's not actually causing a huge handbrake in the system.
This change is too restrictive on hapū and iwi groups in particular, and people
that are outside of these licensing areas that travel in and out
for a variety of reasons.
We just don't think it responds to the way in which people actually live their
lives and how they go in and out of areas.
We object particularly strongly to this part of the bill, and
any change to have effect on reducing community participation should be rejected.
I'm just going to hand over now to Adele.
She's just going to speak to her experience on the ground and some of the
particular issues in our submissions. Thanks.
Thank you, Karen. Tēnā koutou e te mema o te komiti.
Ko Adele Tika toku ingoa. I'm the Managing Senior Legal
Educator and Project Lead for the Alcohol Harm Reduction project at Community
Law Canterbury. I also bring 25 years experience as a
registered social worker and Whānau Ora Navigator working in kaupapa Māori
spaces.
I support my written submission and fully support the submission made by Community
Law Centers Aotearoa, so thank you, Karen.
I want to focus on one issue. The bill risks further excluding Māori
communities from decisions that directly affect our well-being, despite
clear evidence that Māori already disproportionately experience alcohol
harm, and harm is not evenly distributed.
Māori are exposed to alcohol environments not solely due to behavior, but
because of structural factors such as geography and policy decisions.
Alcohol outlets are disproportionately concentrated in lower
socioeconomic communities in areas where Whānau Māori live,
and in Christchurch, we see that very clearly.
In Wolston alone, there are 14 alcohol licenses within a proximity of an
800-meter radius. About 40% of this community are
Māori. Local tamariki are significantly more exposed to alcohol
advertising and environments than children living in more affluent areas.
And every day they walk past bars, bottle stores, broken glass,
alcohol litter, and defiled bus stops just to get to and from school.
And it's a normalization that is not acceptable.
For many communities, this level of saturation is not accidental.
It reflects cumulative policy decisions over time that reinforce
disproportionate alcohol harm in Māori Whānau.
This also shows that outlet density, deprivation, and alcohol harm cannot be
separated from each other. The communities with a higher outlet density are
often the same communities carrying the highest burden for poverty, housing
instability, violence, poor health outcomes, and justice involvement.
A recent National Burden Study in 2024, Aotearoa New Zealand on the burden of
disease, led by Professor Sally Casswell and colleagues through
Shortland Whareke Research Center at Massey University, found that harm caused by
other people's drinking now exceeds the harm experienced by drinkers
themselves, including violence, fetal alcohol, and lifelong
disability.Māori experience this burden at significantly higher
rates. These harms compound across generations, and for Māori,
this is not only a public health issue.
It is a Te Tiriti issue, it is a well-being issue, and it is a whenua issue.
Within Te Ao Māori, the whenua is an extension of our tinana, our bodies.
The environments our whānau are forced to live in directly impact collective
well-being, and when our communities become saturated with alcohol
outlets, the harm is carried
not only by individuals, but by whānau, hapori, and whenua
itself. Our papatipu rūnanga have an important role as
kaitiaki within their rohe,
yet the proposed provisions in this bill restricting who can object to licensing
risks, removing the ability of papatipu to stand up and fight for whānau,
who often cannot fight for themselves within the existing process.
Many whānau are among the walking poor.
Taking time off work to attend hearings can mean a loss of wages, childcare
pressures, transport costs, and a possible choice between participating in
democracy and paying rent. Objecting is already a privilege they
cannot afford, yet having papatipu speak for them is
actually one way in which they can still participate.
And when Māori community members do participate, experiences are not always
positive. Many have told us they felt that they were the ones on trial in DLC
meetings. Instead of feeling heard, they felt interrogated.
Instead of feeling empowered, they felt intimidated.
And for communities already carrying historical distrust of systems and
institutions, those experiences become another barrier to
participation.
Restricting who can object will continue to create barriers for many of the voices
speaking against harm. Te Tiriti o Waitangi requires active protection
and partnership. Partnership requires Māori participation in decisions
affecting our communities. Protection requires preventing foreseeable and
avoidable harm. Participation requires removing barriers, not
creating new ones. Papatipu are not seeking special treatment, but
they are seeking the ability to fulfill responsibilities as kaitiaki,
to restore balance, health, and well-being within whānau, hapori, and whenua.
I ask the committee to strengthen, not weaken community voice, to ensure Te
Tiriti obligations are explicit within this legislation, and to
recognise that alcohol regulation is much more than a business process.
Ngā mihi nui kia koutou. Thank you.
Right. Fantastic. Thank you to both of you.
Right. Any questions from anyone?
Right. Camilla?
Thank you. Thanks both for your submission.
I just had a question for Karen. Karen, you mentioned
about the
claim of vexatious
objections not being made out, and also
the issues around the restriction of that community involvement.
And I just wanted to know, do you think there might be a way of
assessing whether a genuine objection was made
without restricting geographically the area
that people can object from?
Yeah. I think we mentioned in our submissions that having some
sort of demonstrable connection to the location,
in a way so that there is something that needs to show you have a
connection to that area without this geographical limit.
I think that's one way that we've suggested
being able to show some connection there.
Yeah. Okay. Now we've got a question from Huhana Lindon.
Tena koutou. This is a question in relation, again,
to that proximity and drawing the
lines of who can provide submissions.
And thinking about our papatipu rūnanga, their tribal
territories are big.
Mm-hmm.
Should it be something that really, as per what Camilla's
already spoken to, that the submitter should be able to
demonstrate a connection to rohe, and I'm thinking for Māori communities,
and then for iwi and hapū and marae.
Simply because Māori are not
in one particular
geographical area.
We still have whakapapa, for example, some of my work colleagues
have connections to all the papatipu in Horomaka.
So
that in itself, the connection to the whenua itself should actually lend
itself
to papatipu being able to
demonstrate that there is far too much harm happening
to their whānau, and actually act as a voice for their
whānau in that way.
All right.
Thank you to both of you again.
It's nice to have you here.
Yeah.
Right. Now we'll go to the Department of Public Health, University of
Otago.
Tena koutou katoa. I'm here in person.
I don't know whether that's-
And it's fantastic you are.
Ko Anya Vestergaard Toku ingoa. I'm a senior research fellow based at the
Department of Public Health at the University of Otago Wellington campus.
Thank you for the opportunity to talk today.
I'm going to take my submission as read.
I want to reiterate a few points that have been made by other submitters, and also
provide a public health perspective on some of the other commentary that's come up
over the course of the select committee process.
So first, I want to reiterate that alcohol results in substantial harm.
The 900, or 1 in 20 deaths in this country that are due to alcohol,
is really the tip of the iceberg of that harm.
They don't capture a whole wide range of harms that I think have been spoken to
really well by other submitters. I'll also add that
whilst there has been some decline in overall alcohol consumption
and hazardous drinking rates, current levels are still really high and
inequitably distributed. Of the people that choose to drink,
one in 10 of those people are binge drinking on at least a weekly basis.
And I think that's far too high and demonstrates that we've still got a long way to
go in terms of actually having a responsible relationship with
alcohol in this countryThe inequities also make it
particularly important to retain community input,
including the ability for democratically developed local alcohol policies to
influence license renewals. There are areas in this country where there is a bottle
shop on every one of four corners of an intersection, and the current
process of renewals and objectors
having to demonstrate harm in relation to specific premises is
really problematic in the context where there is
that saturation of harm, and it's really easy to pass the buck and say, "Well,
we're a responsible operator. It's the other three on this intersection that are
not the responsible operators in this context." And that's, I think, one of the
areas where the ability for local alcohol policies to influence
renewals is really, really important in terms of reducing overall harm.
I'd also like to draw attention to the fact that our current mechanisms
for keeping track of the number of licenses held, and by whom, at the national
level are inadequate. At the moment, if I, as a public health researcher,
want to figure out how many alcohol outlets there are in the entire country, I can
either rely on the ARLA database, which our own research has shown
is not accurate, and there's considerable discrepancies between the ARLA
database and what's provided by OIA requests to councils,
or I can go and attempt to find those outlets online.
I think if we're going to improve regulation around the sale and supply of
alcohol, we need to bear in mind what the current mechanisms are, and strengthening
those mechanisms to enable communities to see how many outlets
there are, how that compares with other similar areas in the country,
and then to be able to make informed decisions.
I'll also like to talk to clubs. So as a public health
researcher,
whilst a lot of my work has been in the alcohol space, I'm not tied to alcohol
as the only thing that I look at.
I acknowledge that clubs do many things that promote health.
They reduce social isolation, they provide spaces for physical activity, and
so they are really important spaces in the community.
Clearly, high-origin events do contribute to keeping clubs going, and I think
that a much wider conversation needs to be had about how we can support clubs to
fulfill their important community functions.
However, fixing this by just allowing clubs to hold an on-license will
increase harm, especially given that we've heard from clubs themselves about
inconsistencies and the range, like the
inconsistencies across clubs, and also the range of different ways in which
those clubs are operating.
In terms of restaurants holding an on-license and an off-license, I think
that that's problematic.
I think that it incentivizes restaurants to start operating as off licenses
by essentially enabling them to do both.
It doesn't enable this whole taking a bottle of wine home.
I think when we combine the changes to restaurants being
able to hold an on-license
with the some, but limited restriction around rapid alcohol delivery,
you end up in this situation where it becomes economically incentivized
for a restaurant to nominally have a separate trading arm, and
someone can then order rapid delivery of large quantities of alcohol
alongside their Uber Eats purchase to extend their binge drinking session.
So whilst some of these changes in isolation don't seem very
big, I think that the cumulative impact is quite worrying from a public health
perspective.
I really support the changes around
making rapid alcohol delivery, tightening up some of that, and I think it needs to
go a lot further given the ability for substantial harm to be
done, and given the lack of checks that there are in terms of
some of the evidence that's been shown in other submissions.
I'll also reiterate support that's been raised by multiple people in terms of
probably the single smallest change in terms of changing a single
or two characters in the legislation that would reduce harm would
be to reduce off-license trading hours to 9:00 to 9:00 across the board.
This is an effective policy,
or effective change that's been demonstrated overseas
to be effective.
I'll stop there, and I'm happy to answer any questions.
So the 9:00 to 9:00, and I asked this question before about 1,200
fewer violent cases.
Have you got
evidence to support that proposition that if you had
trading from 9:00 to 9:00, which I presume at the moment is 9:00 to 10:00, is it,
everywhere or?
Well, some places can currently open till 11:00.
And so in some places it's reducing it by an hour. It varies by local area.
Okay.
But definitely in terms of
if you wanted to restrict the hours of sale, we know that those
evening purchases are problematic.
There's been some research
released recently by police that talked about pre-loading in Courtney Place,
and
sort of side-loading. The fact that you have off-license premises
that are open quite late hours alongside on-license premises
then enables essentially higher levels of hazardous drinking because
people can leave the club, they can go buy an extra bottle in the bottle shop.
They can then drink that on the street.
Yeah.
And not make it the licensed premises.
So going back to your statement, you reckon 9:00 to 9:00
would make a big difference. That's what your
statement before was, wasn't it?
Yes. I think reducing trading hours to 9:00 to 9:00 across the board
would have significant public health benefits.
Okay. Right. Huhana Lyon.
It's more of a discussion or just wanting to explore with you the
area that you raised around online sales,
deliveries,
and those that receive the product as well.
Having heard there are concerns within community
around access, around training for drivers as well.
Have you put some thought into-...
what that could look like, or those safeguards, I
guess. What are some of those safety rails that you might
recommend?
I think definitely instigating a sort of next day 24-hour pause
on online delivery of alcohol would do
a lot to help sort of the extending binge drinking
sessions that are already in progress.
I think really if somebody or a company is
delivering alcohol,
then the requirements for them in terms of the responsible
checks in terms of that you're not
giving that alcohol to a minor, that that person's not intoxicated,
that should be the case across the board.
It shouldn't matter who is delivering the alcohol.
The requirement should be the same, and there should be significant
penalties for people who are increasing alcohol harm in our
communities by delivering alcohol to underage and already intoxicated
people.
All right. Hey, thank you, Anya, for those comments this morning.
Very helpful, and good that you've turned up.
Right. Now, we're going to Mr. Muir, Jeremy.
I see you've logged in under a different name, but that's fine.
We're keen to hear from you.
You there, Mr. Muir?
Jeremy, are you there? I can see you're there, but you might need
to turn your
sound on. There you are. Good to see you both. Right.
We've got 10 minutes with you. We've read your submission,
but we can't hear you. We can't hear you at all.
You
don't have it blocked. Maybe you're off now. We can't-- Yeah.
Just say something. Can't hear you.
It might be your computer, I think.
You might have to turn up your sound at the toolbar.
Yeah. Something's happening now,
but you'll have to turn your sound off again.
You've got your mute on.
Can you talk now? No.
Still can't hear you.
They need your help.
On your device.
I think it's on your device. You've turned up your sound as much as possible
on your computer?
Yeah, we can't hear you, I'm afraid.
Move on.
Can you hear us now, Andrew?
Yes, we can. Well done.
Oh, awesome.
Right. Let's wrap it around, guys.
Sorry about that.
Yeah. No, no problem.
Ko Jeremy Muir ahau, and alongside my colleague, Jamie Hutana, we're
here today representing Hikatea Tane Ora Tairawhiti.
Firstly, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you, and apologies for our
difficulty connecting properly.
With our written submission taken as read, we'd like to focus on several themes
that sit at the heart of our submission and explain why this bill matters so much
to our communities in Te Tairawhiti.
Before we speak to the legislation itself, it's important to acknowledge that our
region has a long history with this kaupapa.
More than 100 years ago, Sir Apirana Ngata with the East Coast Maori
Council instigated one of the most significant community-led alcohol
reform movements in Aotearoa.
The principle behind that movement was simple: communities
experiencing the harm should have a meaningful say in how alcohol
is regulated.
That principle remains just as relevant today as it was
then. One of the reasons we're concerned about this bill is that it appears
to move us away from that principle.
At a time when communities are carrying the consequences of
alcohol-related harm, several provisions within the bill reduce
opportunities for communities to influence the decisions that affect them.
Tena koutou. Ko Jamie Hutana ahau.
He mokopuna o Porourangi me Kahungunu.
For 25 years, I've worked as a police officer in Te Tairawhiti.
During that time, I've attended numerous incidents where alcohol was a contributing
factor.
Family violence called out serious assaults, road crashes, mental health crisis,
and in some cases, death.
Over time, you begin to understand that alcohol harm is really confined to the
person drinking.
The people most affected are often the people around them.
Children who witness violence, partners who live in fear, parents who are trying to
hold families together,
friends, neighbors, wider whanau who are left dealing with the consequences long
after the incident itself is over.
What the stats don't capture is the cumulative impact that these incidents have
on communities. When alcohol contributes to harm, the effects
are felt
well beyond the immediate event. They affect
relationships, trust, well-being, and the sense of safety people feel in
their own homes and neighborhoods.
The other reality, as I witnessed over many years, was the impact on those
responding. Police officers, ambulance staff,
firefighters, emergency department workers regularly walk into
situations most people never see.
While we are trained to do that work, we are all still human.
We carry those experiences with us.
That is one of the reasons I feel strongly about prevention.
After 25 years on the frontline responding to harm,
I've come to understand that the real measure of success is not how well we
respond when things go wrong,
but how effectively we prevent them from happening at
allTime and again, I have seen the devastating
impact that alcohol-fueled harm can have on individuals,
whanau and communities.
Those experiences have convinced me that we must invest much more
in prevention if we are serious about creating safer and
healthier communities.
My own experience comes from a different perspective.
I led the news team at the Gisborne Herald for more than 20 years as editorial
manager, then editor. I've been on the Gisborne Chamber of Commerce executive board
for the past 20 years, and I've had various community leadership roles.
I'm a Gisborne district councillor now, as well as community strategist with Tane
Ora.
Journalism teaches you to look beyond individual events and pay attention
to patterns.
Over many years, I saw alcohol repeatedly sitting in the background
of some of the most difficult stories affecting our community.
Whether it is violence, road trauma,
crime, family harm, or broader social issues, alcohol
is often a big part of the picture.
At the same time, I also see communities doing extraordinary work to support one
another. I see schools, marae, sports clubs,
businesses, community organizations, and whanau stepping
up to create positive environments and opportunities for people.
One of the lessons I've taken from my experience is that strong
communities are built through connection and participation.
People are more likely to support decisions when they feel they've been part of
shaping them.
That is why we are concerned about proposals that narrow community
participation and alcohol licensing decisions.
In our view, the people who live with the consequences of alcohol harm should not
have less voice, they should have more.
At Hikitea Tane Ora, we are working to prevent future family violence and
sexual violence.
We work upstream, strength based, across a broad range of areas.
But when we look at the huge harm in our communities and whanau from family and
sexual violence, alcohol is a key contributing factor.
We know all too well the impact that policy, good or bad, has in our communities.
One of the things that concerns us about this bill is that it arrives in a
region that is already carrying a significant burden of alcohol related harm.
In Tairawhiti, we continue to experience some of the highest rates of hazardous
drinking in the country.
We continue to see alcohol featuring prominently in family harm incidents.
We continue to see the impacts on whanau wellbeing.
When you've spent years attending those incidents, it becomes difficult to support
policies that further increase alcohol availability
or visibility without first asking whether they are likely to
improve outcomes.
Good prevention requires more than programs and services.
It also requires policy settings that support the outcomes we are trying to
achieve.
From our perspective, legislation should make it easier for communities
to reduce harm,
not harder.
And that point speaks to our biggest concern with the bill.
New Zealand has not had a national alcohol strategy for more than 20 years.
During that time, we've continued to amend legislation, respond to
emerging issues, and invest in different initiatives, but we've done so
without a clear national framework that brings those efforts together.
As a result, we're often debating individual policy changes without first
asking what success looks like.
While national data shows many young people are drinking less, those
gains are not being experienced equitably across Aotearoa, and
certainly not in all parts of Tairawhiti.
What are we trying to achieve?
What does a healthier alcohol environment look like for all our
communities? How do we reduce harm while supporting community
wellbeing? How do we meet our obligations under Te Tiriti o
Waitangi? Those are strategic questions,
and we believe they deserve strategic answers.
That is why one of our strongest recommendations is that this bill be paused while
government develops a modern national alcohol strategy that is evidence
informed, Te Tiriti led, and aligned with international
best practice.
All right. Thank you, guys.
Now-
We've got some just a bit more, sorry.
In closing.
Yeah.
In closing, we also ask the committee to recognize Matariki as
a free public holiday. The Matariki holiday is new, and stopping alcohol
supply on this day gets to the heart of what Matariki is, a time for
whanau wellbeing, a time for remembrance, reflection, connection, and planning for
the future. We often speak about the kind of Aotearoa we want it to
be. Protecting that space is one of the simplest and most effective
ways we can turn our commitment to the wellbeing of future generations.
The reason both Jeremy and I are here today is because alcohol contributes so
much harm in our communities, and we have seen this issue from different angles.
Jeremy has seen it through decades of observing, reporting on the life of our
community. I've seen it through 25 years responding to the consequences when
things go wrong.
Both experiences have led us to Hikitea Tane Ora and lead us to the same
conclusion. Alcohol harm is not inevitable.
Communities have solutions. Prevention does work.
Strong policies matter, and community voice matters.
We respectfully ask the committee to protect that voice, strengthen rather than
weaken local decision-making,
ensure that any changes to alcohol legislation move us closer to healthier
outcomes for whanau and communities across Aotearoa.
I refer back to our tipuna Apirana Ngata and his whakataukī,
"E tipu e rea,
grow up, tender youth, and fulfill the needs of your generation."
Nō reira, tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou, kia ora koutou.
Fantastic.
Right, now we've got one question from Huhana Lyndon.
Tēnā koutou te Tairawhiti.
Thank you for bringing the voice of rural New Zealand into submissions
and clearly articulating the policy gaps that we
haveThis is a mahi, Mr. Chair, because they've
pointed out the fact that we've got a patchwork of policy and
legislation, but we need the overarching strategy to guide.
So I just want to mahi to you. Thank you for being up front in where you
come from, the harms that we have in rural communities, and
also the call for matariki to have a rahui on Waipiro as well
was great. So thank you.
Kia ora.
Yeah. Thank you to both of you. A very thoughtful
submission and lovely to hear from both of you. All right.
All right. Thank you, Andrew.
Right. Now we're going to
Te Hakura.
Hopefully we're online with them as well.
Kia ora. Can you hear me?
We can. Nice to see you both.
What's up?
Right, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Tena koutou e te hiamona, e nga mema o te komiti.
Ko Hone Kewa-Pewhairangi ahau, alongside my colleague Te Rau Kiely.
Ko maua nga mangai mo Te Hakura o te Tai Rawhiti.
Firstly, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
We'd like our written submission to be taken as read.
We'd like to focus on several key kind of themes that emerge from our Te
Hakura wananga, and explain why we believe this bill warrants
careful reconsideration.
Te Hakura is a local collective of health providers, iwi partners,
local government, community organizations, and prevention
practitioners working to reduce alcohol and
nicotine-related harm across Te Tai Rawhiti.
Our submission is informed not only by professional practice, but
by what we are seeing every day across our rohe.
We work alongside whanau, schools, sports clubs,
marae, health services, and community organizations throughout Te Tai
Rawhiti.
The realities discussed in this submission are not theoretical to us.
These are our lived experiences. And I want to be clear,
this submission is not anti-alcohol, nor is it anti-business.
Our concern is whether the amendments proposed within this bill are aligned with
the outcomes that successive governments, communities, public health agencies,
and local authorities have said they wish to achieve, which
are improved wellbeing, stronger communities, and better outcomes for
future generations.
When viewed through that lens, we have
significant concerns.
One of our primary observations is that this bill approaches
alcohol regulation as a series of individual operational
amendments rather than part of a coherent harm reduction
framework.
Many of the proposed changes appear modest when viewed in isolation.
However, communities do not experience policy in isolation.
Communities experience the cumulative effect of policy
settings.
From a systems perspective,
it's difficult to reconcile with the stated commitment to reducing alcohol-related
harm.
During our wananga, participants reflected on the reality that
alcohol already exists within a highly saturated environment.
In Te Tai Rawhiti, alcohol is visible across a broad spectrum of community
settings, and against that backdrop, many participants struggled to
understand the rationale for creating more opportunities for alcohol to become
further embedded within everyday life.
The evidence is clear. Availability matters, exposure matters,
normalization matters. The environments we create influence the
behaviors we later attempt to address.
For that reason, our concern is not necessarily with one or any
single amendment in isolation. It's the cumulative
direction of travel.
One of the realities discussed during our wananga was that communities across the
Te Tai Rawhiti are already carrying a disproportionate burden of
social, economic, and health challenges.
When seen through that lens, policy settings that increase alcohol
availability are likely to compound existing inequities
that communities are already working hard to address.
Another of our issues that we want to raise is around
community voice.
We strongly oppose provisions that would further restrict who can participate
in alcohol licensing decisions. In our view, this
proposal reflects a narrow interpretation of who is affected by
alcohol-related harm.
Whanau do not live their lives in circles drawn on a map.
The impacts of licensed premises extend beyond immediate neighborhoods.
They are felt within our kura, our workplaces, our local sports clubs,
our health services, and wider whanau networks throughout Te Tai Rawhiti.
The proposal to limit objections based on geographic proximity risks
excluding many of the very people who experience the downstream
effects of alcohol availability.
Communities are increasingly being asked to take responsibility for
improving local wellbeing outcomes.
Therefore, they must retain a more meaningful role in decisions
that shape those outcomes.
This bill highlights also a much broader challenge within New Zealand's
alcohol policy environment. As mentioned earlier
by Tane Ora, we're talking about the mechanics of
alcohol regulation without first establishing a shared national vision
for alcohol harm reduction. New Zealand hasn't had a
comprehensive national alcohol strategy for more than 20 years.
It's surprising given the significant harm caused by alcohol, our growing
understanding of prevention science, trauma, and addiction, the impacts
of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, and the evidence showing
ongoing health inequalities.
Successive legislative amendments have occurred in the absence of a
contemporary strategic framework, and as a result, policy
risks becoming reactive, fragmented, and
disconnected from long-term outcomesFor that reason, one of
our strongest recommendations is to pause the bill, develop a
modern national alcohol strategy.
A strategy guided by Te Tiriti o Waitangi, informed by evidence,
aligned with international best practice, and developed alongside the
communities most affected by alcohol-related harm.
While the social and economic costs are significant, the human cost
is even greater. In Te Tai Rāwhiti, where communities are closely
connected, the impacts of alcohol-related harm are rarely experienced
by an individual alone. They are felt across whanau, in
our kura, in our workplaces, and across our whakapapa.
From a Te Ao Māori perspective, alcohol harm is
more than an individual issue. The effects are felt by
whanau, passed across generations, and experienced
throughout communities. For that reason, we are interested not
only in individual choice, but also in the systems,
environments, and conditions that shape those
choices. Across Te Tai Rāwhiti, we also see
examples of what works.
We see the strength that comes from strong whanau connections.
We see how marae provide a place of belonging, support,
and connection. We also see the positive role of sport,
kapa haka, waka ama, cultural identity, and community
leadership. These are more than just activities.
They help protect and support our communities.
They are part of what helps build resilience and reduce harm.
Any serious conversation about reducing alcohol harm must
focus not only on regulating alcohol, but also on
strengthening the people, places, and connections that keep our
communities strong.
The best prevention happens before harm occurs by strengthening people's
sense of connection, identity, belonging, and purpose.
Finally, we wish to reiterate our support for
prohibiting the sale and supply of alcohol on Matariki.
Matariki occupies a unique place within Aotearoa.
It is a time of remembrance, a time of reflection, a time of
renewal, a time when people reconnect with whanau,
whakapapa, and community.
We already recognize that some occasions carry significance beyond commercial
activity. We believe Matariki deserves similar recognition,
not as a symbolic gesture, but as a statement about the values
we wish to uphold as a nation.
In closing, our concern is not that this bill changes
too much. Our concern is that it changes too little in
the areas that matter,
while changing too much in areas that risk further normalizing alcohol
within everyday life. We believe Aotearoa needs a
stronger conversation about alcohol harm than the one currently before us.
One that is informed by evidence, community experience, and a
focus on wellbeing. It should also reflect the
aspirations we have for future generations.
Our perspective comes from a region that knows both challenges and
resilience. Tai Rāwhiti communities have long
demonstrated the ability to respond collectively to
adversity and to create solutions grounded in local knowledge,
relationships, and leadership.
We believe alcohol policy should support those efforts, not
undermine them. We respectfully ask the committee to
protect community voice, reject provisions that increase
alcohol availability and visibility, support strong
harm reduction measures, recognize Matariki as an
alcohol-free public holiday, and initiate the development
of a comprehensive national alcohol strategy for Aotearoa New
Zealand. Nga reira. Tena koutou, tena
koutou, tena koutou katoa. We welcome your
questions.
Okay. We're probably out of time, but I'm going to allow one question.
Huhana Lyon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just wanted to ask about, you had your wananga,
bringing stakeholders and members together in
May.
Can you speak to us around some of the,
I guess, how the workforce is feeling?
Because I know we've been doing a lot of submissions, eh?
Mm.
And how you've tried to pitch this in a positive way.
But what's the weight that our workforce is feeling
in this space?
Okay. As
the workforce is taumaha, they are feeling the taumahatanga of this
kind of mahi.
Working in
intervention has always been a taumaha thing, and so if
we repurpose ourselves and move into prevention,
then intervention will eventually run out of puff.
That was one of the major drawing cards for the
idea of Te Hapūra, was to create a place where we can
influence policy, we can move upstream, as it were,
to help deal with this issue before it became an issue.
Yeah.
All right. Hey, thank you. Thank you to both of you.
Thank you.
Nice we've had two groups from Tai Rāwhiti.
Fantastic to hear from you, and thank you for your contribution.
Tena koutou.
Tena koe.
Right. Now we're going to Matthew Lane.
Night n Day. Hopefully he's with us. Matthew?
Good afternoon.
How are you going?
Very good, thank you.
First of all, thanks for taking the time to allow me to share my
submission today. It's slightly broader in the respect
of modernizing the liquor licensing act
for the current environment. Now, just if
everyone could keep an open mind on this, because it does pitch a slight increase
in off-licenses within New Zealand, but within a
smaller format grocery offering.
Smaller grocery offerings are destination-based purchases versus
incidental touch points on a weekly household shop.
Along with those smaller grocery retailers, you do not find yourself
having to choose or get your pharmacy medications and liquor
within the same premise.In the smaller formats, there's
a higher price for each unit. It's smaller pack sizes and smaller
range. This removes the temptation to bulk buy.
You buy for an occasion, not for stockpiling.
Saturation has been removed as an issue through supermarket
deliveries and third-party providers such as Uber
Eats. You can now get a bottle of vodka delivered to your house within
10 minutes.
Owners of the small format stores
are locals and are also community-minded and
focused.
The retailing of food within these environments is perceived negatively.
However, it provides an opportunity to ensure food is to be
consumed prior to consumption.
It is not used as a draw card compared to supermarkets.
We see them utilizing it heavily
in promotions such as beer and wine week.
And within the smaller formats, it's easier to identify intoxication,
as you do see them walking around the store in a close vicinity.
They are the health reasons primarily why I'm advocating for this to be
extended, but there are also commercial reasons for this.
It gives the supermarkets, who are controlling the food supply in New
Zealand, a competitive advantage.
Smaller retailers
have examples of, we've got 70% of our products complying with the Act
and 30% considered non-compliant.
However, we're let down based on volume of sales,
and it's not correlated to the intent to compete.
The ironic nature of this is the duopoly control the wholesale pricing
of these products, and it gives us limited ability
to build sales in that remaining 70% of products.
They are the sole benefactors of holding these prices high and
removing people to be competitors to increase this.
The modern environment has changed significantly since 2012 amendment,
with supermarkets now retailing coffee, food to go, scoop ice creams,
and having pharmacies within. Combining this with access by third
parties results in the current Act having a
disproportionate impact on smaller
retailers. Not all small retailers deserve it, but there
are some that are integral to the community,
and also are genuinely trying to compete in this grocery space.
By not having this competitive advantage compared to the supermarkets, it
removes the ability to lower food prices across household essentials.
And I guess to summarize there, I
see a lot of benefit in it, but it won't be and shouldn't be all
those smaller retailers. It's not asking for a massive increase,
but more so just modernizing that landscape.
Right. Thanks, Matthew.
Members,
question?
So just so to be absolutely clear, I'm looking at your
recommend. You're saying want to remove off
licenses from supermarket environments
entirely.
So what are you saying by that?
That is correct. So what I'm saying there is
supermarkets sell the majority of alcohol in New Zealand.
I think that's taken-
Yeah
... as a given.
They shouldn't have the competitive advantage compared to other competitors.
All what I'm looking for is an equal landscape.
It would be better public interest to remove it from supermarkets as well
as, but while the supermarkets are retailing it, whether or not smaller
grocery competitors can, but just being one or the other.
Happy for no one to have it in the grocery industry or both smaller and larger.
And so at the moment, you're precluded
from selling because of the square meterage of your
grocery outlets.
A combination of two reasons. Smaller format, so we've got 500
square meter sites, but you have to be over 1,000 square meters to be able to
do it. Otherwise, you go to a test. That test is based on
purely sales of compliant and non-compliant products.
It's a very hard test to satisfy, and one that was created in 2012, and
it's removed any discretion from local licensing authorities.
What I'm proposing is that it's based on selection and intent to
retail, not the amount of volume you can actually put through.
And why was the 1,000 square meters put in place whenever it
was?
It was an arbitrary number which effectively blocked the majority of retailers
other than those within Foodstuffs and Woolworths banners.
How long ago was that put in?
2012.
Oh, sorry. Okay. All right. Hey, thanks, Matthew.
Very interesting proposition you put forward.
Thank you.
All right. Cool. Now we're going to Newtown.
I see Sam
sitting there, and Mario, I think.
Are you at their table? You are, by the look of it.
We are ready to go. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you. ""Kia ora koutou"" Thank you for this
opportunity to provide our oral submission to this Amendment
Bill. My name is Mario Masters. I am the current president of the Newtown
Residents Association. I've been in this role for nine months, since the AGM
in September 2025. Newtown Residents Association has been
an incorporated society since July 1963.
We are a collective of residents and business owners from Newtown and
surrounding suburbs. We actively advocate to
maintain and improve our area's livability, connectedness, and
sustainability, working to make our community a
thriving, diverse, great place to live, work, and play.
We regularly consult on a range of community and local issues
affecting our communities. My colleague and I are here to represent Newtown
Residents Association to share our views in response to this
bill. Sam Summers, treasurer and executive member, will continue to
add to our oral submission. ""Me taki""
Thank you for that, Mario. Okay.
Now, the reason why I'm the one who's led this submission is because I
used to hold a general manager's license for selling alcohol.
I will have to declare a bit of a conflict here.
The business I worked for was Bourbon New Zealand Limited, and owned by the
late Bruce Sydney Flavin. Bruce is friends with Duncan
McKee, and the minister in charge of the bill is Duncan's wife, Nicole.
I just want that to be put on there for it not to be weighted for or against, but
just to sit there and do that.
We, as the Newtown Residents Association, haven't got a stance on whether
we are for or against. Our goal here, as we are in most
situations here, we want to improve the overall outcome for the community.
One of our biggest ones about the objections being tied to one kilometer, a
good example would be is if Wellington Zoo Cafe decide to have a
liquor license, Marie or myself can sit there and put an objection in, but our
secretary, Rona, cannot, nor could Wellington Hospital
because they're just outside the one-kilometer range.
Whereas if we go by our headquarters, which is not at our addresses,
and Woolworths Newtown decided to put a liquor application forward,
we cannot object. And even that, that is literally wasn't within
our community.
We'd like to-
But isn't it within the
Wellington area, so you'd be able to-
Well, it's a bit weird of where it says.
It says the district licensing area or one kilometer.
It's not defined which one is which. It can be...
It needs tidying up.
Okay.
And that's one of the things there.
So we'd like to have that to also be tidied up to expand the
boundaries so that it actually encompasses a real community, and also to bring in
references such as groups and organizations such as ours and other residents
associations across Te Whanganui-a-Tara who
want to have input in their local community.
We are also a
alcohol, was it liquor license banned suburb, so we cannot have
any public consultation of alcohol on the street.
We agree with the provision that it should be the right to
respond for objectors, but that right to be done in writing, not
to be done in a non-written format, so at least that we can keep
transparency going through there.
We also
do support about the requirement to sell low alcohol and
similar drinks. We also want to emphasize to have zero alcohol drinks to
remain available, such as soft drinks or orange juice.
We do have a concern with the hairdressers being permitted to sell.
As we are a alcohol banned suburb,
members of the public who may be illegally drinking may walk into a
hairdresser's or a barber store to get around getting the fine for the
liquor license. We do not believe in that provision, and we should also
believe that it's up to the business owners on what they do there.
We also were a suburb that had the issue with the
Mediterranean Food Warehouse with the on-license and off-license issues.
We do believe that that needs to be tidied up.
The original intent of the Alcohol Reform Bill 2012 was to
have that weighted of an off-license and on-license in the one application.
It clearly has not been exactly
issued as intended. And also the risk of delivery for the
rapid response parts.
Our biggest concern is with minors being able to deal with that.
And
there is currently no mechanism out there to
stop an illegal electronic transaction from happening.
So if a minor with a minor's name on a Visa debit card
goes and orders online,
it will go through. Now, something that all of us know
here, when you go to open up a bank account, you have to have date of birth.
We need to have steps put in place to ensure that not only are we
reducing intoxicated underage sales, but we also are putting steps in place
to prevent illegal sales from happening or an illegal
sale happening that gets aborted at the point of delivery.
Businesses don't want to be sending out alcohol to then have to
have it returned back because of doing that and then having to issue
refunds. So
if there could be a provision put in place that we can also
stop illegal sales from happening, we would like that to
actually be looked at, not just at the point of delivery with the
IDs, but also at the point of the electronic
transaction.
Anything else you'd like to add?
There's nothing else I need to add.
Questions.
Okay. Members?
So Chair, so just to clarify, you'd be happy with that one
kilometer or the licensing district if it was clear?
Well-
Sorry, if it was clear that was the-
It should be one or the other
... quick
It shouldn't be both, but-
Yeah
... the one kilometer is too narrow. It's too narrow.
It needs to be actually within a real community boundary, like
a suburb boundary or a postcode.
But so just to that point-
Mm-hmm
... if it was either,
the boundary would be covered by-
And it would not-
... the local district.
Yes, and it should be the bigger of the two as well, not the smaller of the two.
Yeah. Yeah.
So I think we're saying the same.
Yeah. Okay.
Yeah, we've got time. Righto. All right. I think we're there.
Hey, thank you again,
Sam. We've seen you many times.
But nice to have you here in a different guise.
And thank you, nice for you, Mario, to come today.
Thank you.
Right. Members, we're going to break until 1:00.
And we will see you back here in public session with Dr.
Anna
Casey Cox.
See you guys.